                                         Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




                                         Rectified Robust Policy Optimization for Model-Uncertain
                                         Constrained Reinforcement Learning without Strong Duality

                                         Shaocong Ma                                                                                 scma0908@umd.edu
                                         Department of Computer Science
                                         University of Maryland, College Park

                                         Ziyi Chen                                                                                       zc286@umd.edu
                                         Department of Computer Science
                                         University of Maryland, College Park
arXiv:2508.17448v2 [cs.LG] 19 Sep 2025




                                         Yi Zhou                                                                                      yi.zhou@tamu.edu
                                         Department of Computer Science and Engineering
                                         Texas A&M University

                                         Heng Huang                                                                                       heng@umd.edu
                                         Department of Computer Science
                                         University of Maryland, College Park

                                         Reviewed on OpenReview: https: // openreview. net/ forum? id= 7l63xwAgAW



                                                                                          Abstract

                                                 The goal of robust constrained reinforcement learning (RL) is to optimize an agent’s per-
                                                 formance under the worst-case model uncertainty while satisfying safety or resource con-
                                                 straints. In this paper, we demonstrate that strong duality does not generally hold in robust
                                                 constrained RL, indicating that traditional primal-dual methods may fail to find optimal
                                                 feasible policies. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel primal-only algorithm
                                                 called Rectified Robust Policy Optimization (RRPO), which operates directly on the primal
                                                 problem without relying on dual formulations. We provide theoretical convergence guaran-
                                                 tees under mild regularity assumptions, showing convergence to an approximately optimal
                                                 feasible policy with iteration complexity matching the best-known lower bound when the
                                                 uncertainty set diameter is controlled in a specific level. Empirical results in a grid-world
                                                 environment validate the effectiveness of our approach, demonstrating that RRPO achieves
                                                 robust and safe performance under model uncertainties while the non-robust method can
                                                 violate the worst-case safety constraints.


                                         1   Introduction

                                         In many practical reinforcement learning (RL) applications, it is critical for an agent to not only maximize
                                         expected cumulative rewards but also satisfy certain constraints, such as safety requirements (Yao et al.,
                                         2024; Gu et al., 2024b) or resource limitations (Wang et al., 2023c). However, real-world environments often
                                         diverge from the training environment due to model mismatch (Roy et al., 2017; Viano et al., 2021; Zhai et al.,
                                         2024; Wang et al., 2024) and environment uncertainty (Lütjens et al., 2019; Wang & Zou, 2021; Ma et al.,
                                         2023). Such discrepancies can lead to significant performance degradation and, more severely, violations
                                         of constraints, which is unacceptable in safety-critical applications. For instance, an autonomous robot
                                         may encounter unforeseen transitions due to equipment aging or mechanical failures: In the environment
                                         navigation and the robust control tasks, the robot make take the action that perform better in the ideal
                                         simulated environment due to the ideal equipment condition but suffer high penalty from higher energy cost
                                         or unexpected operations in the worst-case scenario.


                                                                                               1
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Despite its practical importance, robust constrained RL has been relatively underexplored in the literature.
Two closely related areas are robust RL (Bagnell et al., 2001; Nilim & Ghaoui, 2005; Iyengar, 2005) and
constrained RL (Altman, 1999; Wachi & Sui, 2020). Robust RL focuses on optimizing performance under
model uncertainties but typically does not consider constraints. Constrained RL aims to optimize perfor-
mance while satisfying certain constraints but often assumes a fixed environment without uncertainties.
Seamlessly combining two fields presents inherent challenges.
To address these challenges, we propose a framework for robust constrained RL under model uncertainty.
Specifically, we consider Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) where the transition dynamics are not fixed
but lie within an uncertainty set, which is commonly known as the robust MDPs (Mannor et al., 2016; Ho
et al., 2018; Tamar et al., 2013; Grand-Clément & Kroer, 2021). Our objective is to optimize the worst-
case cumulative reward over this uncertainty set while ensuring that all constraints are also simultaneously
satisfied in the worst-case scenario. This robust approach ensures that the agent’s policy remains effective
and safe even when the environment deviates from the nominal model.
A common approach to solving such constrained problems is the primal-dual method (Altman, 1999; Pater-
nain et al., 2019; Bai et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2018; Chen & Wang, 2016; Mahadevan et al., 2014; Chen et al.,
2022), which leverages the strong duality property to efficiently find optimal policies. Strong duality allows
the original constrained problem to be solved by considering its dual problem, simplifying computations and
enabling convergence guarantees. However, a crucial question arises:

       Q1: Does strong duality hold in robust constrained RL?

In this paper, we address this question head-on. We first demonstrate that, unfortunately, strong duality
does not generally hold in robust constrained RL. The presence of model uncertainties breaks the
Fenchel-Moreau condition, the common routine of showing the strong duality in the non-robust constrained
RL (Altman, 1999). We construct a specific counterexample where the duality gap, the difference between
the optimal values of the primal and dual problems, is strictly positive. This finding indicates that traditional
constrained RL algorithm may fail to be directly generalized to the robust constrained setting; we also note
that the non-zero duality gap does not exclude the potential global convergence of primal-dual algorithm.
Recognizing this fundamental issue, we are motivated to ask the following question:
       Q2: Can we develop a non-primal-dual algorithm for solving robust constrained RL problems
       with provable convergence guarantees?

To address this question, we introduce the Rectified Robust Policy Optimization (RRPO), a primal-only
algorithm adapted from the CRPO (Xu et al., 2021). RRPO is specifically designed for robust constrained
RL, which bypasses the issues associated with the duality gap. Our algorithm operates directly on the
primal problem, ensuring constraint satisfaction and robustness without relying on dual formulations or
strong duality assumptions. We summarize our key contributions as follows:

1. Counterexample—Non-Zero Duality Gap: In Section 3, we provide a concrete example showing that
   strong duality does not hold in robust constrained RL. To the best of our knowledge, this negative result
   is the first theoretical example showing the non-zero duality gap in the existing literature, which resolves
   an open problem in constrained robust RL. We emphasize that establishing such a counterexample is
   nontrivial and crucial for understanding the theoretical boundaries of constrained robust RL.
2. Proposed Primal-Only Algorithm—RRPO: Motivated by the lack of strong duality of constrained
   robust RL problems, we introduce RRPO, a primal-only algorithm designed to solve robust constrained RL
   problems without relying on strong duality. Moreover, in Section 4, we rigorously analyze the convergence
   properties of RRPO. Specifically, we prove that under appropriate conditions, RRPO converges to an
   approximately optimal feasible policy π ∗ within a specified tolerance δ in the worst-case scenario. When
   the uncertainty set is sufficiently small, our derived convergence rate and iteration complexity also recover
   the best-possible lower bound for non-robust constrained RL problems (Vaswani et al., 2022).
3. Empirical Validation: We validate the effectiveness of RRPO through experiments in a grid-world
   environment and the classical mountain car environment. Our results show that RRPO achieves robust


                                                       2
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




   and safe performance under model uncertainties, outperforming the original CRPO method that may fail
   to maintain constraint satisfaction in the worst-case scenario.

1.1   Related Work

Robust Constrained RL Here, we mainly explore the existing literature regarding robust constrained RL.
In Section A.1, we provide other related work. Robust constrained RL considers the problem of optimizing
performance while satisfying constraints in the worst-case scenario. Although robust RL and constrained
RL have each been extensively studied, fewer works address their intersection. In Russel & Petrik (2020),
the authors investigate robust constrained RL and propose a heuristic approach that estimates robust value
functions and employs a standard policy gradient method (Sutton et al., 1999), substituting the nominal
value function with the robust one. However, as Wang et al. (2022) points out, this approach overlooks how
the worst-case transition kernel depends on the policy, resulting in updates that do not correspond to actual
gradients of the robust value function and thus lack theoretical convergence guarantees. To remedy this,
Wang et al. (2022) introduces a robust primal-dual algorithm for solving robust constrained RL problems.
However, this method assumes the strong duality, which we will show later, generally does not hold in robust
constrained RL. Several other studies also examine the strong duality of robust constrained RL problems:
Ghosh (2024) points out that the standard routine in proving the strong duality of constrained RL problems
(Panaganti & Kalathil, 2022) cannot hold in the robust case. Zhang et al. (2024) proves the strong duality
by considering a different policy space, which is different from the space considered in Paternain et al. (2019).
We include further discussion on it in Section A.2. Complementing these works, He et al. (2025) tackle the
online distributionally robust off-dynamics setting, and present the ORBIT algorithm that attains sublinear
regret with matching upper and lower sample-complexity bounds under general f -divergence uncertainty
sets.
The uncertainty set captures the discrepancy between training and deployment environments. In our work,
we mainly focus on the (s, a)-rectangular uncertainty set (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & Ghaoui, 2005), where the
transition uncertainty is modeled independently for each state-action pair. As shown by Lu et al. (2024);
Kumar et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2023a); Wang & Zou (2021), this structure induced by a specific norm or
divergence usually enables efficient solution methods through robust value iteration and linear programming,
preserving the tractability of dynamic programming. While our work is also potential to be extended to
other settings when a valid robust policy evaluation algorithm presents, including:

s-Uncertainty Sets The s-rectangular uncertainty set (Li et al., 2022; Li & Shapiro, 2023; Kumar et al.,
2023) relaxes independence by allowing nature to choose transitions jointly across all actions at a given state.
The widely known results include the robust policy gradient formula (Li et al., 2022) and the closed-form
solution for p-norm uncertainty sets (Kumar et al., 2023). These results make it possible to solve the robust
value function more efficiently.

d-Uncertainty Sets More recently, the d-rectangular uncertainty set (Ma et al., 2022) has been proposed
for linear MDPs to further generalize the existing concepts of (s, a)-rectangular uncertainty sets, where the
ambiguity is structured in a low-dimensional decision space, enabling scalable robust value iteration in high-
dimensional settings. Representative works include Blanchet et al. (2023); Liu & Xu (2024a); Liu et al.
(2024); Liu & Xu (2025). Remarkably, this setting has also been widely explored in the offline RL setting
(Tang et al., 2024; Liu & Xu, 2024b). These results make it possible to extend our results potentially to be
able to handle more complicated robust MDPs with the function approximation.
Additionally, we discuss our connection to other setting in the robust reinforcement learning and constrained
reinforcement learning.

Robust RL with Reward and State Uncertainty Modern robust RL tackles misspecified or learned
rewards by optimizing worst-case or risk-aware returns. Early formulations blending nominal and worst-case
objectives (Xu & Mannor, 2006; Delage & Mannor, 2010) have been extended by coupling-aware uncertainty
sets that avoid excessive conservatism (Mannor et al., 2012). Recent work uses Bayesian reward ensembles
and CVaR objectives for preference-based or RLHF settings, giving reliability under noisy learned rewards


                                                       3
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




(Brown et al., 2020). Newest advances address uncertainty inside the reward or state signal itself. Seeing-
is-Not-Believing RSC-MDPs explicitly model spurious correlations in the state and learn policies robust
to such confounding (Ding et al., 2023). Mirror-Descent inverse RL adds robustness directly to the learned
reward via adversarial mirror steps with O(1/T ) regret (Han et al., 2022). Distributional Reward Estimation
builds a reward-uncertainty distribution whose risk-sensitive aggregation stabilises multi-agent training (Hu
et al., 2022). Moreover, robust MDPs cast dynamics error as a zero-sum game; rectangular ambiguity sets
admit efficient robust DP with deterministic optimal policies (Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & Ghaoui, 2005). Follow-
ups loosen rectangularity to retain tractability while reducing pessimism (Wiesemann et al., 2013; Goyal &
Grand-Clement, 2023). Practical algorithms combine adversarial disturbances or domain randomization with
policy learning to harden policies against dynamics shifts (Pinto et al., 2017).

RL with Hard Constraints CMDP theory guarantees optimal stationary policies and LP or primal–dual
solutions (Altman, 1999; Borkar, 2005). Deep RL implementations such as CPO (Achiam et al., 2017) and
RCPO (Tessler et al., 2019) enforce budget or safety limits during learning. Runtime shielding synthesised
from temporal-logic specifications now guarantees safety even under partial observability (Carr et al., 2023).
Quantile-Constrained RL enforces outage-probability bounds by constraining the cost distribution’s tail
rather than its expectation (Jung et al., 2022). Trust-Region Safe Distributional Actor–Critic simultaneously
handles multiple constraints with distributional critics and provable convergence (Kim et al., 2023). Model-
predictive safety filters based on learned control-barrier functions enforce hard state constraints in unknown
stochastic systems while optimizing performance (Wang et al., 2023b). Together these methods wrap (or
jointly train) base policies to guarantee constraint satisfaction without relying on soft penalties.

Safe RL Safe exploration confines learning to recoverable states (Moldovan & Abbeel, 2012) or certified
Lyapunov safe sets (Berkenkamp et al., 2017). Action-level intervention layers correct unsafe commands
on the fly (Dalal et al., 2018a), while risk-sensitive criteria such as CVaR directly penalize catastrophic
tails (Chow et al., 2018a). These threads, alongside recent hard-constraint and shielding techniques above,
provide complementary, constraint-respecting alternatives that our revised Related-Work section now covers.

Robust Constrained Multi-Agent Systems An important extension of robust constrained RL is its
application to multi-agent settings. The concept of robustness has been generalized to multi-agent reinforce-
ment learning (MARL) (Zhang et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2023; Jiao & Li, 2024), particularly in addressing state
uncertainty (He et al., 2023a; Han et al., 2024). Notably, He et al. (2023b) were the first to jointly consider
robustness and constraints in a real-world scenario, proposing the ROCOMA algorithm, which achieves effi-
cient EV rebalancing under transition kernel uncertainty. Many topics in constrained robust MARL remains
unexplored, making it a promising direction with significant potential for further research.


2     Preliminaries and Problem Formulation

In this section, we formalize our problem setting in the context of online robust constrained RL, where the
transition probabilities are unknown. We re-use an existing robust policy evaluation algorithm to estimate
the approximate value function.

2.1   Robust MDPs

A Robust Markov Decision Process (Robust MDP) is defined by the tuple (S, A, P, r, γ), where S is a finite
state space, A is a finite action space, P represents the uncertainty set of transition probabilities with ∆(S)
denoting the probability simplex over S, r : S × A → R is the reward function, γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount
factor. We denote µ ∈ ∆(S) as the initial state distribution.
In an robust MDP, the transition probabilities are not fixed but belong to an uncertainty set; usually, the
uncertainty set P is defined as the s-rectangular set (Derman et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2023a; Wiesemann
et al., 2013; Kumar et al., 2023)
                                                P := ×s∈S Ps ,


                                                      4
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




or (s, a)-rectangular set (Wiesemann et al., 2013; Kumar et al., 2023)

                                             P := ×(s,a)∈S×A P(s,a) .

Here, instead of assuming a specific type of uncertainty set as in many existing literature (Wang & Zou,
2021; Wang et al., 2022), we work on general uncertainty sets but simply assume that the robust value
function over these uncertainty set is computationally available. Notably, for many well-known uncertainty
sets, such as the p-norm (Kumar et al., 2023), IPM (Zhou et al., 2024), and R-contamination (Wang & Zou,
2021) uncertainty set, the robust value function can be efficiently calculated without hurting the sample
complexity.
Let the policy π : S → ∆(A) map each state to a probability distribution over actions. In robust RL,
the robust value function V π (s) under policy π starting from state s is defined as the worst-case expected
discounted cumulative reward:
                                                   " ∞                      #
                                                    X
                                 V (s) = inf Eπ,P
                                   π
                                                        γ r(st , at ) s0 = s ,
                                                          t
                                            P ∈P
                                                         t=0

where the expectation is taken over the trajectories generated by following policy π, with at ∼ π(· | st ) and
st+1 ∼ P (· | st , at ) for P ∈ P. The objective is to find an optimal policy π ∗ that maximizes the worst-case
expected cumulative reward from the initial state distribution µ:
                                                   ∗
                                              V π (µ) = max V π (µ),
                                                                 π

where V π (µ) := Es∼µ [V π (s)].

2.2   Robust Constrained MDPs

In many applications, it is essential to optimize the reward while satisfying certain constraints, even under
model uncertainty. Constrained robust MDPs (Wang et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024; Ghosh,
2024) extend the robust MDP framework by incorporating multiple constraints.
Let there be I constraint reward functions ri : S ×A → R for i = 1, 2, . . . , I. The robust expected cumulative
reward under policy π for constraint i is given by:
                                                    "∞                          #
                                                     X
                                Vi (s) = inf Eπ,P
                                  π
                                                       γ ri (st , at ) s0 = s ,
                                                        t
                                            P ∈P
                                                        t=0

and Viπ (µ) = Es∼µ [Viπ (s)] is the robust expected cumulative cost from the initial distribution µ.
The constrained robust MDP aims to find a policy that maximizes the worst-case reward while ensuring
that each constraint is satisfied under the worst-case transition dynamics:

                                    max     V0π (µ)                                                           (1)
                                      π
                                     s.t.   Viπ (µ) ≥ di ,       for i = 1, 2, . . . , I,

where V0π (µ) denotes the robust expected cumulative reward, and di are the specified thresholds for the
constraints. That is, a constrained robust MDP is defined by the tuple (S, A, P, {ri }Ii=0 , {di }Ii=1 , γ), where
{ri }Ii=0 and {di }Ii=1 extend the original robust MDP to include these constraint reward function ri and the
threshold di .

2.3   Duality Gap of Robust Constrained MDPs

In constrained optimization, the concept of duality plays a pivotal role in formulating and solving problems
(Boyd & Vandenberghe, 2004; Bertsekas et al., 2003). The duality gap is the difference between the optimal
values of the primal problem and its dual. When this gap is zero, we say that strong duality holds, allowing the


                                                             5
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




primal and dual problems to have the same optimal value. This property is instrumental in many optimization
algorithms, particularly in convex optimization, where it enables efficient computation of optimal solutions
via dual methods. For the constrained robust MDP defined earlier, we incorporate the constraints into
the optimization objective, formulating the Lagrangian of the constrained robust RMDP. The Lagrangian
combines the objective function and the constraints using Lagrange multipliers λ = (λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λI ) ≥ 0:
                                                           I
                                                           X
                                   L(π, λ) = V0π (µ) −           λi (di − Viπ (µ)) .                         (2)
                                                           i=1

In this formulation, L(π, λ) is the Lagrangian function, and λi ≥ 0 are the Lagrange multipliers associated
with the constraints. The primal problem is defined by maximizing over π, after minimizing the Lagrangian
over λ ≥ 0. That is,
                                              max min L(π, λ).                                          (3)
                                                   π   λ≥0

The dual problem is then obtained by minimizing the Lagrangian over λ ≥ 0, after maximizing over π.
Specifically, the dual problem is:
                                         min max L(π, λ).                                       (4)
                                               λ≥0     π

The duality gap D is defined as the difference between the optimal value of the primal problem and the
optimal value of the dual problem.
Definition 2.1 (Duality gap of robust constrained MDPs). Let M := (S, A, P, {ri }Ii=0 , {di }Ii=1 , γ) be a
robust constrained MDP. The duality gap D of M is defined as
                                                                
                            D := max min L(π, λ) − min max L(π, λ) ,                                    (5)
                                         π   λ≥0                   λ≥0   π

where L is the Lagrangian function of M defined by Equation (2).

It has been widely known that, in standard constrained MDPs without robustness considerations, under
certain regularity conditions, strong duality holds (Altman, 1999). This means that the duality gap D is
zero, and the optimal value of the primal problem equals that of the dual problem. This property allows us
to use primal-dual algorithms effectively to find optimal policies that satisfy the constraints. However, in
the next section, we will show that the constrained robust MDPs may not have such nice property, which
presents a significant challenge for solving constrained robust RL problems.

3     Constrained Robust RL Has Non-Zero Duality Gap

In this section, we present a counterexample demonstrating that the duality gap in robust constrained MDPs
(Theorem 2.1) can be strictly positive.
Theorem 3.1. There exists a constrained robust MDP such that its duality gap is strictly positive.

Here, we describe the construction of this counterexample. Then we will briefly describe the analysis of the
duality gap. The full proof can be found in Section B.

3.1   Construction of the Counterexample

Consider a simple MDP with two states, s0 and s1 , and two actions, a0 and a1 , as depicted in Figure
1. The MDP is defined as follows: (i) Transitions: The initial state is s0 . From state s1 , any action
deterministically transitions back to state s0 . From state s0 , action a0 deterministically remains in s0 . From
state s0 , action a1 transitions to s0 with probability p and to s1 with probability 1 − p. (ii) Robustness:
There is model uncertainty in the transition probability p, such that p ∈ [p, p], representing the uncertainty
set. (iii) Reward: The reward function for the objective is r0 (s0 ) = 1 and r0 (s1 ) = 0. The reward function
for the constraint is r1 (s0 ) = 0 and r1 (s1 ) = 1. (iv) Constraints: The goal is to maximize the expected
cumulative reward of r0 while ensuring that the expected cumulative reward of r1 meets a specified threshold
ρ under the worst-case transition probabilities.


                                                           6
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




       (a) Transitions under action a0                                         (b) Transitions under action a1




Figure 1: The transition diagram of the MDP considered in Theorem 3.1. At state s1 , the agent always
moves to state s0 with probability 1, regardless of the action taken. At state s0 , the agent has a probability
p of staying in the current state when taking action a1 , and a probability of 1 of staying in state s0 when
taking action a0 . The uncertainty only occurs in the transition probability p; we let it vary from [p, p].


3.2   Analysis of the Duality Gap

The robust control problem can be formulated as:

                                                 max    Ve0π (s0 )                                               (6)
                                                   π

                                                  s.t. Ve1π (s0 ) ≥ ρ,                                           (7)

where Veiπ (s0 ) denotes the worst-case value function for reward ri starting from state s0 .
The associated Lagrangian is:

                                                      1                            γπ1 (1 − p)
                                                                                                        
      L(π, λ) = Ve0π − λ(ρ − Ve1π ) =                                 −λ ρ−                                .
                                         1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )       1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )

with λ ≥ 0, where π1 := π(a1 |s0 ).
We proceed to analyze the Lagrangian function and compute the duality gap by evaluating both the primal
and dual formulations:

Primal Problem The primal optimization problem given by Equation (3) aims to find the policy π that
maximizes Ve0π (s0 ) while satisfying the constraint (7). Here, we directly solve it and obtain

                                                                             1−p
                                                                         ρ
                                                   1                         1−p
                           max min L(π, λ) =          −                                    .
                             π     λ              1−γ                               1−p
                                                            1 − ρ(1 − γ) + ρ(1 − γ)
                                                                                    1−p

Dual Problem The dual problem given by Equation (4) involves minimizing the Lagrangian over λ ≥ 0
for a fixed policy π, and then maximizing over π. The lack of convexity in the robust setting leads to a
discrepancy between the solutions obtained from the primal and dual problems.

                                                        1    1 − p 1 + (1 − p)γ
                                 min max L(π, λ) =         −                    ρ.
                                  λ     π              1−γ   1 − p 1 + (1 − p)γ

It can be obviously observed that when the robustness is absent (i.e. p = p), the primal problem presents
the same value as the dual problem.


                                                          7
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Algorithm 1: Rectified Robust Policy Optimization
Input : initial policy parameters θ0 , empty set N0
for t = 0, · · · , T − 1 do
   // Robust Policy Evaluation (e.g. Algorithm 2)
   Evaluate value functions under πt := πθt : Q̂πi t (s, a) ≈ Qπi t (s, a) for i = 0, 1, . . . , I ;
   Sample state-action pairs (sj , aj ) from the nominal distribution ;
   Compute value estimates Viπt for i = 0, . . . , I ;
   if Viπt ≥ di − δ for all i = 0, 1, . . . , I then
       // Threshold Updates
       Add θt to set N0 and track the feasible policy achieving the largest value πout = πt ;
       Update d0 : dt+1 0   ← V0πt ;
      else if Viπt < di − δ for some i = 1, . . . , I then
         // Constraint Rectification
         Maximize Viπt using Equation (8);
      else if V0πt < d0 − δ then
         // Objective Rectification
         Maximize V0πt using Equation (8);
return: πout


Demonstration of the Duality Gap By selecting values for the parameters (e.g., p = 0.5, p = 0.25,
p = 0.75, γ = 0.5, and ρ = 1), we can compute the exact values of the duality gap:
                                                                                          21
                                   D = max min L(π, λ) − min max L(π, λ) =                   .
                                          π      λ≥0               λ≥0   π                22
As the result, the strong duality does not generally hold for robust constrained MDPs.

Implications of a Non-Zero Duality Gap We have just presented a counterexample showing that strong
duality does not generally hold in robust constrained MDPs, which resolves an open problem regarding the
strong duality of robust constrained RL problems, highlighting the importance of designing solution methods
that do not rely solely on duality. In the subsequent sections, we address these challenges by proposing the
primal-only approach, RRPO.

4      Solving Robust Constrained RL with Unknown Transition Kernel

The lack of strong duality in robust constrained RL presents significant challenges for traditional primal-dual
optimization methods. The presence of a non-zero duality gap means that these methods may fail to find
feasible and optimal policies in robust constrained settings. To overcome this obstacle, we develop a primal-
only algorithm specifically designed for solving robust constrained RL with unknown transition kernel, which
we call RRPO.

4.1     Algorithm Design

Given the primal optimization problem:

                                        max       V0π (µ)
                                          π
                                          s.t.    Viπ (µ) ≥ di , for i = 1, 2, . . . I.

Here, we note that all Viπ (i = 0, 1, . . . , I) represent the robust value functions; when i = 0, we call V0π the
objective value function, while when i ̸= 0, we call Viπ the constraint value function. The core concept of
the CRPO algorithm (Xu et al., 2021) is to iteratively update the policy by taking gradients with respect


                                                               8
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Algorithm 2: Robust Linear Temporal Difference (Zhou et al., 2024)
Input : policy π, number of steps K, value function approximation Vw = ψ ⊤ w
Initialize: w0 , s0 ;
for k = 0, . . . , K − 1 do
   Sample action ak ∼ π(· | sk );
   Sample transition batch yk+1 according to the nominal kernel P0 (·|sk , ak );
   // For IPM estimator: (Zhou et al., 2024)
                                  h                                                  i
   Update wk+1 ← wk + αk ψ(sk ) r(sk , ak ) + γVwk (yk+1 ) − γδ∥wk,2:d ∥ − ψ(sk )⊤ wk ;
return wK


to either the objective function or the constraints, depending on whether the current policy violates any
constraints:

• If the constraint Viπ (i = 1, 2, . . . , I) is violated, then the CRPO algorithm updates the violated constraint
  value function Viπ .

• If all constraints are not violated, then the CRPO algorithm updates the objective value function V0π .

However, when constraints are near their boundaries, this method can lead to oscillations, making it difficult
to track the performance of feasible policies and potentially resulting in unsafe policy outcomes when the
model uncertainty presents. As the result, the algorithm cannot “remember" the highest objective value
achieved by the feasible policy. To mitigate these limitations, our RRPO algorithm adopts a reformulated
approach. Rather than following the standard CRPO routine, we leverage the constrained form of the
original optimization problem to employ the CRPO algorithm as follows. We reformulate it into the following
constrained maximization problem by introducing an auxiliary variable d0 :

                                      max     d0
                                      d0 ,π

                                       s.t.   V0π (µ) ≥ d0 ,
                                              Viπ (µ) ≥ di , for i = 1, 2, . . . I.

At each iteration, the algorithm evaluates the robust value functions Viπt for all i = 0, 1, . . . , I. Based on
these evaluations, the algorithm proceeds in one of three categories:

1. Threshold Updates: If the current policy satisfies all constraints within a specified tolerance δ (that is,
   Viπt ≥ di − δ for i = 0, 1, . . . , I), the algorithm updates the boundary threshold by setting d0 ← V0πt (µ).

2. Constraint Rectification: If any constraint is violated beyond the tolerance δ (that is, there exists
   i = 1, 2, . . . , I, Viπt (µ) > di − δ), the algorithm performs policy improvement steps to maximize the
   violated constraint, aiming to reduce constraint violation.

3. Objective Rectification: If the objective value V0πt (µ) is less than the current best boundary threshold
   d0 − δ, the algorithm performs policy improvement steps to recover the objective value.

This procedure ensures that the policy maintains pursuing the feasibility while making progress towards
optimizing the objective function. This procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.

Robust Policy Evaluation Subroutine We consider the robust policy evaluation subroutine as a mod-
ular component decoupled from policy optimization. This procedure estimates the Q-function used in the
natural policy gradient update. At each iteration, the agent interacts with the environment under the current
policy πt to collect trajectories consisting of (s, a, r, s′ ) tuples. These samples are used to estimate the robust


                                                           9
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Q-function Qπi t (s, a) for both the objective (i = 0) and each constraint (i = 1, . . . , I). For value approxima-
tion, we adopt robust temporal-difference (TD) learning methods tailored to the chosen uncertainty model
(e.g., p-norm or IPM uncertainty). Specifically, given a nominal transition model and an uncertainty set,
we compute the worst-case expected value using closed-form solutions or dual formulations from prior work
(e.g., Kumar et al. (2023); Zhou et al. (2024); Wang & Zou (2021)). These robust Q-estimates are then used
to guide policy updates via a natural policy gradient step. The data collection procedure incorporated with
this subroutine is further described in the Algorithm 1.

4.2   Handling Uncertainty

In our proposed algorithm design, we apply the robust natural policy gradient (Lemma 2, Zhou et al. (2024))
to maximize the value function. The update rule of maximizing Viπt (µ) is given by

                                                    exp ηQπi t (s, a)/(1 − γ)
                                                                                
                                      πt+1 (a|s) = πt (a|s)                       ,                            (8)
                                                                    Zt

where the normalization factor Zt is defined as Zt := a∈A πt (a|s) exp ηQπi t (s, a)/(1 − γ) . When consider-
                                                       P                                        

ing the softmax parametrization πθ (a|s) := Pexp(θ(s,a))
                                                 exp(θ(s,a′ )
                                                              , it is shown by Zhou et al. (2024) that this update
                                                      a′
rule is equivalent to

                                            θt+1 (s, a) = θt (s, a) + ηQπi t (s, a),                           (9)

where θ is taken over RS×A . Throughout this paper, we will use the parametric and policy representations
interchangeably. In updating the policy, accurate evaluation of Qπi (s, a) is critical. To achieve this, we
decouple the robust value function evaluation from the policy optimization step. This modular design allows
us to integrate existing robust RL methods for value function approximation effectively.
Below, we highlight several promising approaches for approximating the robust value function:

• p-norm uncertainty set (Kumar et al., 2023): For each state-action pair (s, a), define

                                       U(s,a) = { u ∈ R|S| | ⟨u, 1⟩ = 0, ∥u∥p ≤ β}.

   Let P0 be the nominal transition distribution. Then the corresponding uncertainty sets for transition
   probabilities are given by

                   P(s,a) :=         P0 (· | s, a) + u | u ∈ U(s,a) ,     and     P := ×(s,a)∈S×A P(s,a) .    (10)
                                 


   As shown in Proposition 2.3 of Kumar et al. (2023), the standard TD-learning algorithm can be applied,
   with adding a correction term, to compute the robust value function under this p-norm uncertainty model.

• The integral probability metric (IPM) uncertainty set (Zhou et al., 2024): Let F ⊂ R|S| be a
  function class including the zero function. The IPM is defined as dF (p, q) = supf ∈F {p⊤ f − q ⊤ f }. The
  IPM uncertainty set is defined as

                 P(s,a) :=       Ps,a | dF (Ps,a , P0 (·|s, a)) ≤ β ,       and    P := ×(s,a)∈S×A P(s,a) .
                             


   Using the robust TD-learning algorithm (Algorithm 2, Zhou et al. (2024)), we can compute an approximate
   robust value function V̂iπ (µ). By leveraging the relationship between the robust value function and the
   robust Q-function (Proposition 2.2, Li et al. (2022)), along with the analytical worst-case formulation
   (Proposition 1, Zhou et al. (2024)), we can derive an approximate robust Q-function.

We acknowledge that other approaches also exist for approximating the robust Q-value function, such as
Wang et al. (2023a); Sun et al. (2024); we omit these results due to the limited pages.


                                                              10
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




4.3   Global Convergence Guarantees

In this subsection, we establish the global convergence guarantee for RRPO under certain assumptions.
Specifically, we assume: (1) The robust policy evaluation provides sufficiently accurate estimates. (2) Under
the worst-case scenario, the policy still maintains sufficient exploration.
Assumption 4.1 (Policy Evaluation Accuracy). The approximate robust value functions Q̂πi (s, a) satisfy
|Q̂πi (s, a) − Qπi (s, a)| ≤ ϵapprox for all s ∈ S, a ∈ A, and i = 0, . . . , I.

This assumption of sufficient accuracy in policy evaluation is mild and is widely adopted in the existing
reinforcement learning literature (Wang et al., 2019; Cayci et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2023).
As previously noted, this condition can be readily satisfied for specific uncertainty sets. We will discuss the
value of ϵapprox in the appendix.
Assumption 4.2 (Worst-Case Exploration). For any policy π and its worst-case transition P , there exists
pmin > 0 such that its state visitation probability satisfies dπ,P
                                                                 µ (s) ≥ pmin for all s ∈ S, where dµ
                                                                                                     π,P
                                                                                                         is the
state visitation distribution starting from initial distribution µ under policy π and transition P .
Remark 4.3. This assumption imposes a uniform lower bound for all policies π; another widely accepted
assumption is made on the finite-horizon scenario (He et al., 2025), which adopt a complementary requirement
that caps the relative re-weighting between nominal and adversarial dynamics. Exploring algorithms that
retain our absolute-coverage guarantee while accommodating the ratio-based perspective of He et al. (2025)
is an interesting avenue for future work.
The exploration assumption can hold under appropriate exploration mechanisms, especially with classical
exploration techniques e.g. the initial state randomization; instead of a fixed initial state, we may use a
uniform distribution over the state space, ensuring the state visitation probability is always lower bounded.
Moreover, this assumption de facto weakens some existing assumptions; for example, Theorem 2 (Chen &
Huang, 2024) assumes there exists pmin > 0 such that inf s,a,s′ P (s′ |s, a) ≥ pmin for all uncertainty transition
P . Assumption 2 (Zhou et al., 2024) assumes that the nominal transition is supported by all transitions in
the given uncertainty set. If we are given the access to the robust policy evaluation oracle (Theorem 4.1),
these widely used assumptions could be replaced with requiring the exploration on the worst-case transition
instead of each transition in the uncertainty set.
Assumption 4.4. The diameter of the uncertainty set c is given as

                                     sup sup dTV (P (·|s, a), P ′ (·|s, a)) ≤ c.
                                    P,P ′ ∈C s,a


This bounded-diameter condition restricts the variability of transition kernels within the uncertainty set.
Intuitively, it ensures that all candidate models in C are uniformly close to each other in terms of total
variation distance, so the adversarial environment cannot deviate arbitrarily from the nominal dynamics.
Such boundedness assumptions are standard in robust RL and are used by Ma et al. (2023), serving as a
mild regularity condition to ensure well-posedness of the optimization problem.
Our main theoretical result is as follows. Here, we present a simplified version to highlight the most critical
components, including the convergence rate and sample complexity. The detailed upper bound is provided
in Section C.
Theorem 4.5. Consider the NPG update rule Equation (8) with the learning rate η = Θ( √1T ). Let the
constraint violation tolerance δ = Θ( √1T )+O(c), and the approximation error ϵapprox = Θ( √1T ). Under these
conditions, there exists an iteration T such that the output policy πout satisfies
                                                                  1
                                    E[V ∗ (µ) − V πout (µ)] = O( √ )+O(c),
                                                                   T
                ∗
where V ∗ := V π for the optimal feasible policy π ∗ and

                                         max di − Viπout (µ)
                                              
                                                                   ≤ δ.
                                              i


                                                        11
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Remark 4.6. Compared to Kitamura et al. (2025), which achieves a complexity of O(ϵ−4 ) for exact conver-
gence, our results establish a faster rate of O(ϵ−2 ), up to an additional constant error determined by the
uncertainty set diameter c. Specifically, our method converges to a neighborhood of the optimal policy, with
the residual value error bounded by c. When c is sufficiently small (e.g., when the uncertainty set is chosen
to be small), our approach yields a strictly faster convergence rate up to an additive O(c) term. The full
version of Theorem 4.5 and the detailed proof are provided in Section C.

Discussion on the correction from the previous version of this work In our initial submission1 , we
did not include the dependence on the uncertainty diameter c in the upper bound. This oversight was iden-
tified through the OpenReview discussion (https://openreview.net/forum?id=7l63xwAgAW). Specifically,
the problem arose because Theorem C.5 incorrectly upper bounded the advantage function when it takes
negative values. In the current version, we have addressed this issue by introducing Theorem 4.4. Using
the proposed RRPO (Algorithm 1), there is a constant gap linearly depending on the uncertainty diameter
c, and cannot be closed for any ϵ less than this tolerance. Also, as indicated by Theorem 4 (Panaganti &
Kalathil, 2022), if only learnt using the nominal model, one can show that the policy will incur another
constant cost. Hence, the algorithm that solves CMDP (and thus, the CRPO) should have the same bound
for this given constant.


4.4    Discussion

As shown in Theorem 4.5, to achieve ϵ-accuracy to the optimal feasible policy π ∗ up to a constant error
term depending on the uncertainty diameter c, it takes at most O(ϵ−2 ) iterations. Here, we use a specific
uncertainty set to illustrate how the O(ϵ−4 ) sample complexity is obtained. Assume we are considering the
(s, a)-rectangular uncertainty set defined by the p-norm:

                                     U(s,a) = {u ∈ R|S| | ⟨u, 1⟩ = 0, ∥u∥p ≤ β}.

Let P0 be the nominal distribution. Then

                      P(s,a) := {P0 (·|s, a) + u | u ∈ U(s,a) },   and   P := ×(s,a)∈S×A P(s,a) ,

are the uncertainty set we consider. At each step t, we learn an ϵ-accurate robust Q-function, which takes
O(ϵ−2 ) samples; this complexity is guaranteed by applying its Proposition 4.7, Kumar et al. (2023), to
the standard TD-learning algorithm. Since Algorithm 1 requires T = O(ϵ−2 ) iterations (to obtain an
approximated optimal policy up to a O(c)-level error) and the ϵ-accurate policy evaluation requires K =
O(ϵ−2 ) samples, the total sample complexity is given by T · K = O(ϵ−4 ).

Comparison with Kitamura et al. (2025) While Kitamura et al. (2025) also employs a constrained-
form optimization framework (called the epigraph formulation), our approach is fundamentally different. (1)
Their method updates the maximum constraint violation, while we adopt the original CRPO update rule
with tracking the auxiliary parameter. (2) Their algorithm requires an additional binary search step, while
our method preserves the simplicity of the CRPO framework without such overhead.


5     Numerical Examples

To better illustrate the impact of model uncertainty on the algorithm performance, especially on the worst-
case feasibility, we conducted experiments comparing the proposed RRPO and the CRPO (Xu et al., 2021).
For all experiments, we used a discount factor γ = 0.99 and the 2-norm uncertainty set defined by Equa-
tion (10).

    1 https://openreview.net/notes/edits/attachment?id=sTVCrqgWu6&name=pdf




                                                           12
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




5.1   The FrozenLake-Like Gridworld

First, we consider a specific 4 × 6 FrozenLake-like gridworld environment: The agent starts from the left-top
corner posstart = [1, 1] and can make four actions,

                                     A = {UP, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT},

to move to the target point postarget = [2, 5].




Figure 2: Illustration of two paths to the target in the grid-world environment. The shortest path (Left)
prioritizes efficiency but risks violating constraints in slippery conditions, whereas the longer path (Right)
always ensures safety in the worst-case scenario.

We define two reward functions. The main reward function r0 is defined as
                                             
                                             +1
                                                   if s′ is the target
                              r0 (s, a, s ) = −1
                                         ′
                                                    if s′ is a brown block .
                                               −0.1 otherwise
                                             
                                             

It gives +1 for reaching the target, −1 for landing on a brown block, and −0.1 otherwise. The constraint
reward function r1 is defined as:
                                             
                                             −1 if s is out of the boundary
                                                    ′

                              r1 (s, a, s ) = −1 if s′ is a brown block
                                         ′
                                                                             .
                                               0  otherwise
                                             
                                             

It assigns −1 for stepping out of the boundary or onto a brown block, and 0 otherwise, leading to a cost
function c(s, a) := −E[r1 (s, a, s′ )]. We require −V1π (µ) < 0.2, ensuring the agent avoids hitting brown blocks
or moves out of the boundary. The training environment is deterministic, where each action leads to the
intended movement with probability one unless the agent hits a boundary or a brown block. When this
happens, the agent’s position is not changed (if it hits the boundary) or is reset to the starting position (if
it hits the brown block). The test environment introduces a “slippery” dynamic, where every move has a
probability p of resulting in an unintended slip. This slippery setting mimics conditions that may not have
been foreseen during training, effectively representing a worst-case scenario. Under this setting, the obstacles
construct two distinct paths routing to the target, which is illustrated in Figure 2.
We apply our proposed RRPO to solve this constrained robust RL problem, comparing it with the baseline
CRPO method. As shown in Figure 3a, our method successfully learns the safer path, while the non-robust
algorithm converges to the shortest path.

5.2   Mountain Car

We also consider the classical Mountain Car environment from Gymnasium (Towers et al., 2024) to test the
performance of the proposed RRPO in the classical control problem. We use its default reward function r0 ,
which penalizes −1.0 each step and rewards 0 if the agent reaches the goal; that is,
                                              (
                                                0  if the agent reaches the goal,
                              r0 (s, a, s ) =
                                         ′
                                                −1 otherwise.


                                                       13
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




(a) Illustration of two paths to the target in the grid-      (b) Reward and cost comparison across nominal and
world environment. The shortest path (Left) prioritizes       worst-case transitions for the mountain car environment.
efficiency but risks violating constraints in slippery con-   In the nominal environment, both algorithms learn the
ditions, whereas the longer path (Right) always ensures       desired strategies to reach the goal; however, in the worst-
safety in the worst-case scenario.                            case scenario, the RRPO algorithm can learn more robust
                                                              strategy to avoid exceeding the speed constraint.

Figure 3: Reward and cost trajectories for CRPO and RRPO under nominal and worst-case transitions in
Grid World (Figure 3a) and Mountain Car (Figure 3b) environments.



To emphasize safety, we add a constraint reward function r1 (s, a, s′ ) defined as

                                               (
                                                −1    if the car’s speed exceeds 0.06,
                               r1 (s, a, s ) =
                                         ′
                                                0     otherwise.


It returns −1.0 whenever the car’s speed exceeds 0.06 and returns 0 otherwise, which encourages the agent to
maintain a safe speed throughout its run. We also consider its cost description as c(s, a) := −Es′ [ r1 (s, a, s′ )].
For the environment uncertainty, we perturb the “gravity” parameter of the Mountain Car environment. In
the worst-case scenario, the gravity is increased from the nominal value 0.0025 to 0.003. The experiment
results are shown in Figure 3b; the proposed RRPO method receives much less cost in the worst-case
environment.


6    Extended Experiments: Robust Control

Additionally, we compare the performance of the RRPO algorithm with other robust RL baselines, including
the robust policy gradient and the robust primal-dual policy gradient methods, on the HalfCheetah-v4
environment from Robust Gymnasium (Gu et al., 2025). We also conduct an ablation study to evaluate the
impact of our modification to the original robust CRPO algorithm, demonstrating that it effectively reduces
oscillations near the constraint boundary. Although the Safety MuJoCo environment (Gu et al., 2024a), also
available in Robust Gymnasium, offers benchmarks with hard safety constraints, its formulation requires
additional adaptation to fit our setting. Therefore, we employ a custom energy constraint that penalizes
energy consumption at each step. We include the experiment details and the hyper-parameter setting in
Section D.4.


                                                          14
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Figure 4: Comparison among our proposed RRPO algorithm and other robust RL baselines in the robust
HalfCheetah environment (shown in the left panel). The standard robust policy gradient algorithm achieves
the highest score but violates the energy constraint as shown in the right panel. Within the given constraint,
RRPO outperforms the primal-dual approach as shown in the middle panel.


6.1   Comparison with Other Robust RL Algorithms

We conducted a comparative evaluation of three robust RL algorithms on the HalfCheetah-v4 environment
from Robust Gymnasium (Gu et al., 2025): (i) Robust Policy Gradient. (ii) Robust Primal-Dual Policy
Gradient. (iii) Our proposed RRPO algorithm.
The agent learns to maximize forward locomotion speed while respecting energy consumption constraints.
The reward function follows the standard HalfCheetah formulation:

                                    r0 (s, a) = forward_velocity − 0.1∥a∥2 ,

encouraging rapid forward movement while penalizing excessive control effort. Crucially, we implement a
separate energy constraint defined as the squared L2 norm of the action vector

                                               r1 (s, a) = −∥a∥2

with a threshold of −0.25 (note that this threshold is applied to the value function instead of the current step
cost; it does not apply to the constraint cost shown in Figure 3). We include the detailed hyper-parameter
setting in Section D.4.

6.2   Ablation: Robust CRPO Algorithm

In the ablation experiment, we compare our RRPO algorithm with the Robust version of CRPO algo-
rithm (that is, we replace the value function used in the CRPO algorithm with the robust value function).
The only difference presented here is the rectification mechanism used in Algorithm 1 where the RRPO
algorithm tracks the best feasible policy as the πout in the threshold update step. We follow the same setting
as described in Section D.4. To compare both methods, we evaluate the variance of the primal reward of the
output policy. In the RRPO algorithm, this variance primarily stems from inherent randomness in the policy
and environment. In CRPO, however, an additional source of variance arises from the random sampling of
the output policy. As a result, CRPO exhibits substantially higher variance than RRPO.

7     Conclusion

In this paper, we investigated robust constrained RL problems and demonstrated that strong duality generally
DOES NOT hold in this setting, thereby limiting the effectiveness of some methods which rely on the strong
duality. To address this challenge, we introduced RRPO, a primal-only algorithm that directly optimizes the
policy while rectifying constraint violations without relying on dual formulations. Our theoretical analysis,
under mild boundedness and exploration assumptions, provided convergence guarantees for RRPO, ensuring
that it converges to an approximately optimal policy up to a O(c)-level value function error that satisfies the


                                                      15
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Figure 5: Comparison of the variance of the primal reward r0 of the output policy from CRPO (Xu et al.,
2021) and the RRPO (Algorithm 1). The CRPO method exhibits substantially higher variance than RRPO.


constraints within a specified tolerance under worst-case scenarios. Empirical results validate the effectiveness
of our approach. We believe our work opens new avenues for exploring and designing non-primal-dual
approaches to solve robust constrained RL problems, and potentially leads to an interesting direction to
identify when the strong duality of robust constrained RL holds.

Acknowledgments

We are especially grateful to Arnob Ghosh and Toshinori Kitamura for their valuable feedback on our
manuscript posted on OpenReview (https://openreview.net/forum?id=7l63xwAgAW). Their comments
helped us improve the presentation and correct a technical error in the earlier version. The work of Yi Zhou
was supported by the National Science Foundation under grants DMS-2134223, ECCS-2237830. Shaocong
Ma, Ziyi Chen, Heng Huang are partially supported by NSF IIS 2347592, 2348169, DBI 2405416, CCF
2348306, CNS 2347617, RISE 2536663.

References
Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In Proceedings
  of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 22–31, 2017.

Eitan Altman. Constrained Markov Decision Processes. CRC Press, 1999.

Kavosh Asadi, Shoham Sabach, Yao Liu, Omer Gottesman, and Rasool Fakoor. Td convergence: An opti-
 mization perspective. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.

J. Andrew Bagnell, Andrew Y. Ng, and Jeff G. Schneider. Solving uncertain markov decision processes.
  Technical Report CMU-RI-TR-01-25, Carnegie Mellon University, 2001.

Qinbo Bai, Amrit Singh Bedi, Mridul Agarwal, Alec Koppel, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Achieving zero constraint
  violation for constrained reinforcement learning via primal-dual approach. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 3682–3689, 2022.

Felix Berkenkamp, Matteo Turchetta, Angela P. Schoellig, and Andreas Krause. Safe model-based rein-
  forcement learning with stability guarantees. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30
  (NIPS), pp. 908–919, 2017.

Dimitri P. Bertsekas, Angelia Nedic, and Asuman E. Ozdaglar. Convex Analysis and Optimization. Athena
  Scientific, Belmont, MA, 2003. ISBN 1886529450.


                                                       16
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Jose Blanchet, Miao Lu, Tong Zhang, and Han Zhong. Double pessimism is provably efficient for distribu-
  tionally robust offline reinforcement learning: Generic algorithm and robust partial coverage. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:66845–66859, 2023.
Vivek S. Borkar. An actor-critic algorithm for constrained Markov decision processes. Systems & Control
  Letters, 54(3):207–213, 2005.
Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
  2004. ISBN 9781316179512.
David Brandfonbrener and Joan Bruna. Geometric insights into the convergence of nonlinear td learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12185, 2019.
Daniel S. Brown, Scott Niekum, and Marek Petrik. Bayesian robust optimization for imitation learning. In
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (NeurIPS), 2020.
Steven Carr, Nils Jansen, Sebastian Junges, and Ufuk Topcu. Safe reinforcement learning via shielding under
  partial observability. In Proceedings of the 37th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2023.
Semih Cayci, Niao He, and R Srikant. Finite-time analysis of entropy-regularized neural natural actor-critic
  algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00833, 2022.
Yichen Chen and Mengdi Wang. Stochastic primal-dual methods and sample complexity of reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.02516, 2016.
Ziyi Chen and Heng Huang. Accelerated policy gradient for s-rectangular robust mdps with large state
  spaces. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Ziyi Chen, Shaocong Ma, and Yi Zhou. Finding correlated equilibrium of constrained markov game: A
  primal-dual approach. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:25560–25572, 2022.
Yinlam Chow, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Lucy Janson, and Marco Pavone. Risk-constrained reinforcement
  learning with percentile risk criteria. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18:1–51, 2018a.
Yinlam Chow, Ofir Nachum, Edgar Duenez-Guzman, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. A lyapunov-based
  approach to safe reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  8092–8101, 2018b.
Gal Dalal, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Matej Vecerik, Todd Hester, Cosmin Paduraru, and Yuval Tassa. Safe
 exploration in continuous action spaces. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 2018a.
Gal Dalal, Elad Gilboa, Shie Mannor, and Amnon Shashua. Safe exploration in continuous action spaces. In
 Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2752–
 2761, 2018b.
Erick Delage and Shie Mannor. Percentile optimization for Markov decision processes with parameter un-
  certainty. Operations Research, 58(1):203–213, 2010.
Esther Derman, Matthieu Geist, and Shie Mannor. Twice regularized mdps and the equivalence between
  robustness and regularization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:22274–22287, 2021.
Dongsheng Ding, Shaofeng Zhang, Tianxing Zhang, and Liwei Wang. Natural policy gradient primal-dual
 method for constrained markov decision processes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 pp. 19138–19148, 2020.
Wenhao Ding, Laixi Shi, Yuejie Chi, and Ding Zhao. Seeing is not believing: Robust reinforcement learning
 against spurious correlation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Arnob Ghosh. Sample complexity for obtaining sub-optimality and violation bound for distributionally
  robust constrained mdp. In First Reinforcement Learning Safety Workshop, 2024.


                                                    17
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Vineet Goyal and Julien Grand-Clement. Robust Markov decision processes: Beyond rectangularity. Math-
  ematics of Operations Research, 48(1):203–226, 2023.

Julien Grand-Clément and Christian Kroer. Scalable first-order methods for robust mdps. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 12086–12094, 2021.

Shangding Gu, Bilgehan Sel, Yuhao Ding, Lu Wang, Qingwei Lin, Ming Jin, and Alois Knoll. Balance
  reward and safety optimization for safe reinforcement learning: A perspective of gradient manipulation.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 38, pp. 21099–21106, 2024a.

Shangding Gu, Long Yang, Yali Du, Guang Chen, Florian Walter, Jun Wang, and Alois Knoll. A review of
  safe reinforcement learning: Methods, theories and applications. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence, 2024b.

Shangding Gu, Laixi Shi, Muning Wen, Ming Jin, Eric Mazumdar, Yuejie Chi, Adam Wierman, and Costas
  Spanos. Robust gymnasium: A unified modular benchmark for robust reinforcement learning. In The
  Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=2uQBSa2X4R.

Dong-Sig Han, Hyunseo Kim, Hyundo Lee, JeHwan Ryu, and Byoung-Tak Zhang. Robust imitation via
 mirror descent inverse reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
 (NeurIPS), 2022.

Songyang Han, Sanbao Su, Sihong He, Shuo Han, Haizhao Yang, Shaofeng Zou, and Fei Miao. What is
  the solution for state-adversarial multi-agent reinforcement learning? Transactions on Machine Learning
  Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HyqSwNhM3x.

Sihong He, Songyang Han, Sanbao Su, Shuo Han, Shaofeng Zou, and Fei Miao. Robust multi-agent rein-
  forcement learning with state uncertainty. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR), 2023a.
  ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CqTkapZ6H9.

Sihong He, Yue Wang, Shuo Han, Shaofeng Zou, and Fei Miao. A robust and constrained multi-agent rein-
  forcement learning electric vehicle rebalancing method in amod systems. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ International
  Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5637–5644. IEEE, 2023b.

Yiting He, Zhishuai Liu, Weixin Wang, and Pan Xu. Sample complexity of distributionally robust off-
  dynamics reinforcement learning with online interaction. In Forty-second International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=pJdMOKqdSV.

Chin Pang Ho, Marek Petrik, and Wolfram Wiesemann. Fast bellman updates for robust mdps. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1979–1988. PMLR, 2018.

Mingyi Hong, Hoi-To Wai, Zhaoran Wang, and Zhuoran Yang. A two-timescale stochastic algorithm frame-
 work for bilevel optimization: Complexity analysis and application to actor-critic. SIAM Journal on
 Optimization, 33(1):147–180, 2023.

Linfang Hou, Liang Pang, Xin Hong, Yanyan Lan, Zhiming Ma, and Dawei Yin. Robust reinforcement
  learning with wasserstein constraint. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.00945, 2020.

Jifeng Hu, Yanchao Sun, Hechang Chen, Sili Huang, Haiyin Piao, Yi Chang, and Lichao Sun. Distributional
   reward estimation for effective multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.

Garud N. Iyengar. Robust dynamic programming. Mathematics of Operations Research, 30(2):257–280,
 2005.

Yuchen Jiao and Gen Li. Minimax-optimal multi-agent robust reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2412.19873, 2024.


                                                     18
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Whiyoung Jung, Myungsik Cho, Jongeui Park, and Youngchul Sung. Quantile constrained reinforcement
 learning: A framework constraining outage probability. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Dohyeong Kim, Kyungjae Lee, and Songhwai Oh. Trust region-based safe distributional reinforcement
 learning for multiple constraints. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Toshinori Kitamura, Tadashi Kozuno, Wataru Kumagai, Kenta Hoshino, Yohei Hosoe, Kazumi Kasaura,
  Masashi Hamaya, Paavo Parmas, and Yutaka Matsuo. Near-optimal policy identification in robust con-
  strained markov decision processes via epigraph form. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=G5sPv4KSjR.
Navdeep Kumar, Esther Derman, Matthieu Geist, Kfir Y Levy, and Shie Mannor. Policy gradient for
  rectangular robust markov decision processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:
  59477–59501, 2023.
Gen Li, Changxiao Cai, Yuxin Chen, Yuting Wei, and Yuejie Chi. Is q-learning minimax optimal? a tight
 sample complexity analysis. Operations Research, 72(1):222–236, 2024.
Yan Li and Alexander Shapiro. Rectangularity and duality of distributionally robust markov decision pro-
  cesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11139, 2023.
Yan Li, Guanghui Lan, and Tuo Zhao. First-order policy optimization for robust markov decision process.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10579, 2022.
Qingkai Liang, Fanyu Que, and Eytan Modiano. Accelerated primal-dual policy optimization for safe rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06480, 2018.
Shiau Hong Lim and Huan Xu. Reinforcement learning in robust markov decision processes. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 701–709, 2013.
Yunan Liu, Shaofeng Zhang, and Liwei Wang. Fast global convergence of policy optimization for constrained
  mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04692, 2021.
Zhishuai Liu and Pan Xu. Distributionally robust off-dynamics reinforcement learning: Provable efficiency
  with linear function approximation. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 2719–2727. PMLR, 2024a.
Zhishuai Liu and Pan Xu. Minimax optimal and computationally efficient algorithms for distributionally
  robust offline reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09621, 2024b.
Zhishuai Liu and Pan Xu. Linear mixture distributionally robust markov decision processes. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2505.18044, 2025.
Zhishuai Liu, Weixin Wang, and Pan Xu. Upper and lower bounds for distributionally robust off-dynamics
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20521, 2024.
Miao Lu, Han Zhong, Tong Zhang, and Jose Blanchet. Distributionally robust reinforcement learning
 with interactive data collection: Fundamental hardness and near-optimal algorithm. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2404.03578, 2024.
Björn Lütjens, Michael Everett, and Jonathan P How. Safe reinforcement learning with model uncertainty
  estimates. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 8662–8668. IEEE,
  2019.
Shaocong Ma, Ziyi Chen, Shaofeng Zou, and Yi Zhou. Decentralized robust v-learning for solving markov
  games with model uncertainty. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(371):1–40, 2023.
Xiaoteng Ma, Zhipeng Liang, Jose Blanchet, Mingwen Liu, Li Xia, Jiheng Zhang, Qianchuan Zhao, and
  Zhengyuan Zhou. Distributionally robust offline reinforcement learning with linear function approximation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.06620, 2022.


                                                    19
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Sridhar Mahadevan, Bo Liu, Philip Thomas, Will Dabney, Steve Giguere, Nicholas Jacek, Ian Gemp, and
  Ji Liu. Proximal reinforcement learning: A new theory of sequential decision making in primal-dual spaces.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1405.6757, 2014.

Shie Mannor, Ofir Mebel, and Huan Xu. Lightning does not strike twice: Robust MDPs with coupled
  uncertainty. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2012.

Shie Mannor, Ofir Mebel, and Huan Xu. Robust mdps with k-rectangular uncertainty. Mathematics of
  Operations Research, 41(4):1484–1509, 2016.

Teodor Mihai Moldovan and Pieter Abbeel. Safe exploration in Markov decision processes. In Proceedings
  of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2012.

Arnab Nilim and Laurent El Ghaoui. Robust control of Markov decision processes with uncertain transition
  matrices. Operations Research, 53(5):780–798, 2005.

Kishan Panaganti and Dileep Kalathil. Sample complexity of robust reinforcement learning with a generative
  model. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 9582–9602. PMLR, 2022.

Santiago Paternain, Luiz Chamon, Miguel Calvo-Fullana, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Constrained reinforcement
  learning has zero duality gap. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Lerrel Pinto, James Davidson, Rahul Sukthankar, and Abhinav Gupta. Robust adversarial reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2817–
  2826, 2017.

Aurko Roy, Huan Xu, and Sebastian Pokutta. Reinforcement learning under model mismatch. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Nathan Russel and Marek Petrik. Robust constrained-mdps: Soft-constrained robust policy optimization
  under model uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04870, 2020.

Jay K. Satia and Roy E. Lave Jr. Markovian decision processes with uncertain transition probabilities.
  Operations Research, 21(3):728–740, 1973.

Adam Stooke, Joshua Achiam, and Pieter Abbeel. Responsive safety in reinforcement learning by pid
  lagrangian methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9133–9143, 2020.

Zhongchang Sun, Sihong He, Fei Miao, and Shaofeng Zou. Constrained reinforcement learning under model
  mismatch. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods for rein-
  forcement learning with function approximation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 12, pp. 1057–1063, 1999.

Aviv Tamar, Huan Xu, and Shie Mannor. Scaling up robust mdps by reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1306.6189, 2013.

Cheng Tang, Zhishuai Liu, and Pan Xu. Robust offline reinforcement learning with linearly structured
  f -divergence regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18612, 2024.

Chen Tessler, Daniel J. Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. Reward constrained policy optimization. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

Mark Towers, Ariel Kwiatkowski, Jordan Terry, John U Balis, Gianluca De Cola, Tristan Deleu, Manuel
 Goulão, Andreas Kallinteris, Markus Krimmel, Arjun KG, et al. Gymnasium: A standard interface for
 reinforcement learning environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17032, 2024.

Sharan Vaswani, Lin Yang, and Csaba Szepesvári. Near-optimal sample complexity bounds for constrained
  mdps. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:3110–3122, 2022.


                                                    20
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Luca Viano, Yu-Ting Huang, Parameswaran Kamalaruban, Adrian Weller, and Volkan Cevher. Robust
  inverse reinforcement learning under transition dynamics mismatch. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:25917–25931, 2021.
Akifumi Wachi and Yanan Sui. Safe reinforcement learning in constrained markov decision processes. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9797–9806. PMLR, 2020.
Lingxiao Wang, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Neural policy gradient methods: Global opti-
  mality and rates of convergence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01150, 2019.
Qiuhao Wang, Chin Pang Ho, and Marek Petrik. Policy gradient in robust mdps with global convergence
  guarantee. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 35763–35797. PMLR, 2023a.
Yixuan Wang, Simon S. Zhan, Ruochen Jiao, Zhilu Wang, Wanxin Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang,
  Chao Huang, and Qi Zhu. Enforcing hard constraints with soft barriers: Safe reinforcement learning
  in unknown stochastic environments. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2023b.
Yue Wang and Shaofeng Zou. Online robust reinforcement learning with model uncertainty. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:7193–7206, 2021.
Yue Wang and Shaofeng Zou. Policy gradient method for robust reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
  the 36th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 8443–8450, 2022.
Yue Wang, Fei Miao, and Shaofeng Zou.        Robust constrained reinforcement learning.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.06866, 2022.
Yue Wang, Zhongchang Sun, and Shaofeng Zou. A unified principle of pessimism for offline reinforcement
  learning under model mismatch. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 2024.
Zhihai Wang, Taoxing Pan, Qi Zhou, and Jie Wang. Efficient exploration in resource-restricted reinforcement
  learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 10279–10287,
  2023c.
Wolfram Wiesemann, Daniel Kuhn, and Berç Rustem. Robust Markov decision processes. Mathematics of
 Operations Research, 38(1):153–183, 2013.
Huan Xu and Shie Mannor. The robustness-performance tradeoff in Markov decision processes. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems 19 (NIPS), pp. 1537–1544, 2006.
Tengyu Xu, Yingbin Liang, and Guanghui Lan. Crpo: A new approach for safe reinforcement learning with
  convergence guarantee. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11480–11491. PMLR, 2021.
Lantao Yang and Chongjie Zhang. Projection-based constrained policy optimization. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 12345–12356, 2020.
Yihang Yao, Zuxin Liu, Zhepeng Cen, Jiacheng Zhu, Wenhao Yu, Tingnan Zhang, and Ding Zhao.
  Constraint-conditioned policy optimization for versatile safe reinforcement learning. Advances in Neu-
  ral Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
Peng Zhai, Xiaoyi Wei, Taixian Hou, Xiaopeng Ji, Zhiyan Dong, Jiafu Yi, and Lihua Zhang. Robust proximal
  adversarial reinforcement learning under model mismatch. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
Kaiqing Zhang, Tao Sun, Yunzhe Tao, Sahika Genc, Sunil Mallya, and Tamer Basar. Robust multi-agent
 reinforcement learning with model uncertainty. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
 10571–10583, 2020.
Zhengfei Zhang, Kishan Panaganti, Laixi Shi, Yanan Sui, Adam Wierman, and Yisong Yue. Distributionally
  robust constrained reinforcement learning under strong duality. Reinforcement Learning Journal, 4:1793–
  1821, 2024.


                                                    21
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Ruida Zhou, Tao Liu, Min Cheng, Dileep Kalathil, PR Kumar, and Chao Tian. Natural actor-critic for
  robust reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 36, 2024.



A     Further Discussions on Related Work

In this section, we include further discussions on existing literature include other closely related areas and
clarification of existing results on the strong duality of robust constrained RL problems.

A.1   Other Related Work

In this section, we further explore the two closely related areas: robust RL and constrained RL.

Robust RL Robust reinforcement learning (RL) aims to develop policies that perform well under the
worst-case transitions. Early works on robust RL primarily focused on model-based approaches, where the
uncertainty set of transition probabilities is known or can be estimated, and robust policies are computed
using robust dynamic programming techniques (Bagnell et al., 2001; Iyengar, 2005; Nilim & Ghaoui, 2005;
Satia & Lave Jr., 1973; Wiesemann et al., 2013; Lim & Xu, 2013). These methods consider worst-case
scenarios over the uncertainty set to ensure robustness. In the model-free setting, robust RL algorithms
have been proposed that do not require explicit knowledge of the uncertainty set but instead utilize samples
to estimate robust value functions and policies (Roy et al., 2017; Wang & Zou, 2021; Panaganti & Kalathil,
2022). These methods often involve solving a robust optimization problem over the estimated uncertainties.
Recent theoretical advancements overcome the issues of directly solving the worst-case transitions. Wang &
Zou (2022) considers the R-contamination model to obtain the unbiased estimator for the policy gradient
method. Zhou et al. (2024) applies the double sampling method or the structure of the IPM uncertainty
structure to obtain the unbiased estimation involving the worst-case transition probability. And Kumar
et al. (2023) provides the analytical solution for the p-norm uncertainty set. These advancements allow us
to directly obtain the robust policy gradient or the robut value function without estimating the worst-case
transition probability.

Constrained RL Constrained reinforcement learning extends the standard RL framework by incorporat-
ing constraints into the agent’s decision-making process, aiming to optimize performance while satisfying
certain safety, resource, or risk constraints (Altman, 1999). A widely used approach for solving constrained
RL problems is the primal-dual method (Paternain et al., 2019; Tessler et al., 2019; Liang et al., 2018; Stooke
et al., 2020), which leverages the strong duality property of constrained RL (Altman, 1999) to formulate a
Lagrangian that combines the objective function with the weighted constraints. These methods iteratively
update the policy and the Lagrange multipliers, and convergence guarantees have been established under
certain conditions (Ding et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021). However, these methods rely on the assumption of
strong duality, which may not hold in more complex settings. Alternative methods, known as primal meth-
ods, enforce constraints directly by projecting policies onto the feasible set or using safe policy improvement
techniques (Achiam et al., 2017; Chow et al., 2018b; Dalal et al., 2018b; Xu et al., 2021; Yang & Zhang,
2020). These methods aim to ensure constraint satisfaction without relying on dual variables.

A.2   Strong Duality in Robust Constrained RL Problems

In this section, we provide more detailed discussions in the existing literature discussing the strong duality
in robust constrained RL problems.
In the existing literature, Ghosh (2024) provide an intuitive explanation for why existing primal-dual methods
for non-robust constrained RL problems could fail in robust case: In the standard routine of showing the
strong duality (Paternain et al., 2019; Altman, 1999), the state visitation distribution dπ,P is convex in the
                                                                                      ′
policy π; that is, there always exists a policy π ′ such that (1 − α)dπ,P + αdπ,P = dπ ,P . However, this relation
obviously does not hold, which makes the strong duality of robust constrained RL problems unclear. Our


                                                       22
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




counterexample offers a theoretical justification of this conjecture by providing a concrete example where
the duality gap is strictly positive.
Additionally, Zhang et al. (2024) has proved the strong duality for robust constrained RL problems by
employing the “randomization trick" that modifies the optimization problem’s policy space. However, their
results do not apply to our setting. Specifically, it doesn’t consider the space of all random policies; instead,
it only considers the distribution of deterministic policies. The choice of deterministic policy is made at
the beginning of each round. This approach redefines the robust constrained RL problem to ensure strong
duality, differing from the classical definition used in constrained RL (Altman, 1999; Paternain et al., 2019).
Our work, instead, aims to align with this classical definition, highlighting that without such extensions,
strong duality may not hold.
As the result, existing literature has not addressed the critical question in the robust constrained RL prob-
lems, which is what we aim to solve in this paper.

B     Counterexample: Robust Constrained RL with Non-Zero Duality Gap

Proof. We divide the proof into three parts: (1) The construction of counterexample constrained robust
MDP. (2) The evaluation of Lagrangian function. (3) The evaluation of the duality gap.

1. Construction of the constrained robust MDP:
    We consider the constrained robust MDP described in Figure 6 (which is the same as Figure 1). The
    nominal transition probability is explicitly defined as follows:

                                               P (s0 | a0 , s0 ) = 1,
                                               P (s1 | a0 , s0 ) = 0,
                                               P (s0 | a1 , s0 ) = p,
                                               P (s1 | a1 , s0 ) = 1 − p,
                                               P (s0 | a0 , s1 ) = 1,
                                               P (s1 | a0 , s1 ) = 0,
                                               P (s0 | a1 , s1 ) = 1,
                                               P (s1 | a1 , s1 ) = 0.

    Then we obtain the state transition probability induced by the policy π:

                                                     π0 + π 1 p 1
                                                                 
                                            Pπ =                    ,
                                                     π1 (1 − p) 0

    where π0 := π(a0 |s0 ) and π1 := π(a1 |s0 ). The action at the state s1 doesn’t make any differences. The
    (i, j)-th entry of P π represents the probability of moving from sj to siby following the policy π. We fix
                                                                              1
    the initial state to s0 . Its corresponding distribution is given by µ0 =     . The reward for the objective
                                                                            0
                                1                                           0
                               
    value function is r0 =         . The reward for the constraint is r1 =    . Here, we only consider a single
                                0                                           1
    constraint.
    Lastly, we consider the following (s, a)-uncertainty set defined by the L∞ distance:

                                    Vs,a := {0}, for (s, a) ̸= (s0 , a1 )
                                  Vs0 ,a1 := {v ∈ R|S| | ⟨v, 1|S| ⟩ = 0, ∥v∥∞ ≤ β},
                                    Us,a := Vs,a + P.

    Given this uncertainty set, the value of p varies from p − δ to p + δ. Here, we further assume that p is
    strictly less than 1, δ < p, and p + δ < 1. We denote p := p + δ and p := p − δ.


                                                         23
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




     (a) Transition when taking the action a0 .                         (b) Transition when taking the action a1 .




Figure 6: The transition diagram of the MDP considered in Theorem 3.1. At state s1 , the agent always
moves to state s0 with probability 1, regardless of the action taken. At state s0 , the agent has a probability
p of staying in the current state when taking action a1 , and a probability of 1 of staying in state s0 when
taking action a0 . The uncertainty only occurs in the transition probability p; we let it vary from [p, p].


2. Evaluate the Lagrangian function:
   Now we evaluate the discounted visitation measure of the policy π. Define      the discounted visitation
                                                        1 − γ(π0 + π1 p) −γ
                                                                             
   measure as d := (I − γP ) µ0 . Because I − γP =
                          π −1                    π
                                                                               , where µ0 is the initial state
                                                          −γπ1 (1 − p)     1
   distribution. Then we obtain
                        1           1                            1         1            1
                                                                                          
                                                    γ
                d=                                                  =                            .
                   |I − γP π | γπ1 (1 − p) 1 − γ + γπ1 (1 − p) 0       |I − γP π | γπ1 (1 − p)

   Here, | · | represent the determinant. And we choose γ to ensure ∥γP π ∥2 < 1.
   Given the discounted visitation measure, we immediately obtain the non-robust value function of each
   reward by using V π (µ0 ) = r⊤ d:
                                                                1
                                       V0π (µ0 ) =                              ,
                                                   1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )
                                                          γπ1 (1 − p)
                                       V1π (µ0 ) =                              .
                                                   1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )

   From our definition of the uncertainty set, we have p ∈ [p, p]. Then the robust value function of each
   reward is:
                                                                           1
                               Ve0π (µ0 ) = min V0π (µ0 ) =                                ,
                                            p                 1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )
                                                                     γπ1 (1 − p)
                               Ve1π (µ0 ) = min V1π (µ0 ) =                                .
                                            p                 1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )

   Therefore, the Lagrangian function is given by

                  L(π, λ) = Ve0π − λ(ρ − Ve1π )
                                          1                            γπ1 (1 − p)
                                                                                            
                           =                              −λ ρ−                                .
                             1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )       1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )

3. Evaluate the duality gap:
   It suffices to evaluate both minλ maxπ L(π, λ) and maxπ minλ L(π, λ).


                                                         24
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




  • Solve minλ maxπ L(π, λ):
    We will solve ∂L
                  ∂π ≥ 0 to find monotone intervals of the function L(·, λ) : π 7→ L(π, λ). Then we will
    obtain when L(·, λ) : π 7→ L(π, λ) achieves its maxima.
                  ∂L         −(1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )
                     =                             2
                  ∂π    1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )
                          γ(1 − p) 1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 ) − γπ1 (1 − p) (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )
                                                                                            
                      +λ                                                      2
                                                [1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )]
                             −(1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )                    (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )
                     =                             2 + λ                               2.
                        1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )       [1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )]

     Let ∂L
         ∂π ≥ 0. We obtain

                                                   1−p                1−p
                                       λ                   2 ≥                 2
                                         [1 + π1 (1 − p)γ]      1 + π1 (1 − p)γ
                                         1−p                   2                   2
                               =⇒      λ        1 + π1 (1 − p)γ ≥ [1 + π1 (1 − p)γ]
                                         1−p
                                       s
                                            1−p
                               =⇒                  1 + π1 (1 − p)γ ≥ [1 + π1 (1 − p)γ] .
                                                                   
                                          λ
                                            1−p

     Then we obtain             s                   "                 s      #
                                      1−p                                1−p
                                    λ     − 1 ≥ π1 γ (1 − p) − (1 − p) λ       .
                                      1−p                                1−p

     It is easy to notice that when λ ≤ 1−p
                                        1−p , the coefficient of π1
                                           "                   s       #
                                                                   1−p
                                               (1 − p) − (1 − p) λ       ≥ 0.
                                                                   1−p

     When λ ≥ 1−p
              1−p
                  , the coefficient of π1
                                           "                   s       #
                                                                   1−p
                                               (1 − p) − (1 − p) λ       ≤ 0.
                                                                   1−p

     We separately consider each case to solve the monotone intervals.
                                                         q
     ◦ Case 1: λ ≤ 1−p
                    1−p
                        . In this case, (1 − p) − (1 − p) λ 1−p
                                                            1−p
                                                                ≥ 0. It solves:
                                                          hq       i
                                                         λ 1−p
                                                           1−p − 1
                                           π1 ≤ h                 q      i.
                                               γ (1 − p) − (1 − p) λ 1−p
                                                                     1−p

        We further consider if this upper bound
                                           hq is positive
                                                      i or negative.
                         1−p
        ▷ Case 1.1: λ ≥ 1−p . In this case,      1−p − 1 ≥ 0. It violates λ ≤ 1−p .
                                               λ 1−p                          1−p

                        1−p
                                            hq          i
        ▷ Case 1.2: λ ≤ 1−p . In this case,      1−p − 1 ≤ 0.
                                               λ 1−p
        Therefore, in the Case 1 (λ ≤ 1−p
                                      1−p ), we always have π1 ≤ 0. It indicates that L(π, λ) is decreasing
        in π1 when π1 ∈ [0, 1]. The maximum is achieved when setting π1 = 0. That is,
                                                                      1
                                           max L(π, λ) = L(0, λ) =       − λρ,
                                               π                     1−γ
        where 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1−p
                      1−p
                          .


                                                         25
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)



                                                        q
     ◦ Case 2: λ ≥ 1−p
                   1−p . In this case, (1 − p) − (1 − p)    1−p
                                                          λ 1−p ≤ 0. It solves:
                                                          hq     i
                                                       λ 1−p
                                                         1−p − 1
                                         π1 ≥ h                 q      i.
                                             γ (1 − p) − (1 − p) λ 1−p
                                                                   1−p

        Again, we further consider if this lower
                                             hq bound isipositive or negative:
                          1−p
        ▷ Case 2.1: λ ≥ 1−p . In this case,         1−p − 1 ≥ 0. It indicates that L(π, λ) is increasing in π1
                                                  λ 1−p
          when π1 ∈ [0, 1]. The maximum is achieved
                                                hq at x1 = i1.
                                1−p
                    1−p ≤ λ ≤ 1−p . In this case,
        ▷ Case 2.2: 1−p                              1−p − 1 ≤ 0. It indicates that L(π, λ) is decreasing
                                                   λ 1−p
          then increasing within π1 ∈ [0, 1]. The maximum is either achieved at x1 = 1 or x1 = 0. We need
          to decide which one is larger: When x1 = 1, we have
                                              1
                                                                                             
                                                                           γ(1 − p)
                        L(1, λ) =                           −λ ρ−
                                  1 − γ + (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )         1 − γ + (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )
          or when x1 = 0,
                                                                1
                                                  L(0, λ) =        − λρ.
                                                               1−γ
          By letting L(1, λ) ≥ L(0, λ), we solve the boundary is
                                                         1 − p 1 + (1 − p)γ
                                                  λ̂ =                      .
                                                         1 − p 1 + (1 − p)γ

          It means if λ ≥ λ̂, then L(1, λ) ≥ L(0, λ). If λ ≤ λ̂, then L(1, λ) ≤ L(0, λ).
        Combining both Case 2.1 and Case 2.2, we obtain
                                                      (
                                                        L(1, λ) λ ≥ λ̂
                                      max L(π, λ) =                        1−p ,
                                        π               L(0, λ) λ̂ ≥ λ ≥ 1−p

                   1−p
        where λ̂ = 1−p 1+(1−p)γ
                       1+(1−p)γ .
     Now, combining both Case 1 and Case 2, we have
                                                (
                                                  L(1, λ) λ ≥ λ̂
                                  max L(π, λ) =                      ,
                                    π             L(0, λ) λ̂ ≥ λ ≥ 0
                 1−p
     where λ̂ = 1−p 1+(1−p)γ
                    1+(1−p)γ . When λ = λ̂, the function maxπ L(π, ·) : λ 7→ maxπ L(π, λ) achieves its
     minimum. That is,
                                                  1      1 − p 1 + (1 − p)γ
                               min max L(π, λ) =       −                    ρ.
                                λ   π            1−γ     1 − p 1 + (1 − p)γ
  • Solve maxπ minλ L(π, λ):
    We let the constraint be satisfied; that is
                                                   γπ1 (1 − p)
                                       ρ−                                ≤ 0.
                                            1 − γ + π1 (1 − p)(γ − γ 2 )
     Otherwise, simply letting λ = +∞ will lead to −∞ function value. It solves

                                       ρ(1 − γ) ≤ [1 − ρ(1 − γ)]γ(1 − p)π1 .

     Since ρ must be less than 1−γ
                                1
                                   (so, 1 − (1 − γ)ρ ≥ 0), we have

                                                         ρ(1 − γ)
                                           π1 ≥                          .
                                                  [1 − ρ(1 − γ)]γ(1 − p)

                                                         26
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




                                                      ρ(1−γ)
      Therefore, the maximum is achieved at π1 = [1−ρ(1−γ)]γ(1−p) :

                              max min L(π, λ) = max Ve0π
                               π       λ                   π
                                                                    1
                                                      =
                                                                   ρ(1−γ)2 1−p
                                                          1 − γ + 1−ρ(1−γ) 1−p
                                                                                 1−p
                                                         1               ρ 1−p
                                                      =     −                         1−p .
                                                        1−γ   1 − ρ(1 − γ) + ρ(1 − γ)  1−p


    Therefore, the duality gap is given by

                           D(L) = max min L(π, λ) − min max L(π, λ)
                                        π     λ                 λ   π
                                                                                 1−p
                                       1 − p 1 + (1 − p)γ               ρ 1−p
                                   =                      ρ−                         1−p .
                                       1 − p 1 + (1 − p)γ    1 − ρ(1 − γ) + ρ(1 − γ)   1−p


When p = p, the duality gap turns to be exactly 0. It is because the constrained non-robust RL problem has
zero duality gap. However, when we set p = γ = 0.5, p = 0.75, p = 0.25, and ρ = 1. We have the non-zero
duality gap
                                                          21
                                               D(L) =        .
                                                          22



C     Proof of Theorem 4.5

In this section, we provide the detailed proof of Theorem 4.5.

C.1    Assumptions

In this subsection, we recap the assumptions used in this proof. We additionally restrict all rewards to [0, 1];
however, this restriction is not crucial. It only affects the constant upper bound of robust value (or Q)
functions V π and Qπ . We can relax this assumption to a general [−rmax , rmax ] with changing the upper and
lower bound of these value functions to be r1−γ
                                             max
                                                 .
Assumption C.1 (Policy Evaluation Accuracy). The approximate robust value functions Q̂πi (s, a) satisfy
|Q̂πi (s, a) − Qπi (s, a)| ≤ ϵapprox for all s ∈ S, a ∈ A, and i = 0, . . . , I.
Assumption C.2 (Worst-Case Exploration). For any policy π and its worst-case transition P , there exists
a positive constant pmin > 0 such that its state visitation probability satisfies dπ,P
                                                                                    µ (s) ≥ pmin for all s ∈ S,
where dµ is the state visitation distribution starting from initial distribution µ under policy π and transition
        π,P

P.
Assumption C.3 (Bounded Rewards). For all rewards ri : S × A → R, it satisfies

                                                      0 ≤ ri (s, a) ≤ 1

for all (s, a) ∈ S × A.

Assumption C.4. The diameter of the uncertainty set C is given as

                                        sup sup dTV (P (·|s, a), P ′ (·|s, a)) ≤ c.
                                       P,P ′ ∈C s,a




                                                               27
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




C.2   Supporting Lemmas

We summarize all required lemmas in this subsection. These lemmas will be used to prove the main result.
The following performance difference lemma is originally developed by Zhou et al. (2024) for bounding the
value function difference of two policies π ′ and π. Here we apply Theorem 4.2 to turn the upper and lower
bound to transition this inequality to the desired distribution needed in our convergence analysis.
Lemma C.5 (Robust performance difference lemma). Let π, π ′ be two policies and P, P ′ be their worst-case
transition kernels. Suppose that µ is the initial distribution over the state space S. Then
            1                                         ′                  1
               E π′ ,P ′ Ea∼π′ (·|s) [Aπ (s, a)] ≤ V π (µ) − V π (µ) ≤      E π′ ,P Ea∼π′ (·|s) [Aπ (s, a)].        (11)
          1 − γ s∼dµ                                                   1 − γ s∼dµ

Proof. Equation (11) is given by Lemma 8 from Zhou et al. (2024).
Remark C.6. Moreover, we have
             ′                   1
          V π (µ) − V π (µ) ≤        E π′ ,P Ea∼π′ (·|s) [Aπ (s, a)]
                               1 − γ s∼dµ
                                 1                                         1
                             ≤       E π′ ,P Ea∼π′ (·|s) [Aπ (s, a)] −          E π′ ,P ′ Ea∼π′ (·|s) [Aπ (s, a)]
                               1 − γ s∼dµ                                1 − γ s∼dµ
                                   1
                               +      E π′ ,P ′ Ea∼π′ (·|s) [Aπ (s, a)]
                                 1 − γ s∼dµ
                                 1                                            2            ′  ′     ′
                             ≤       E π′ ,P ′ Ea∼π′ (·|s) [Aπ (s, a)] +           dTV (dπµ ,P , dπµ ,P )
                               1 − γ s∼dµ                                 (1 − γ)2

Lemma C.7. Let the NPG update rule be given by

                                                     exp η Q̂πt (s, a)/(1 − γ)
                                                                              
                               πt+1 (a|s) = πt (a|s)                            ,
                                                                 Zt

where the normalization factor Zt := a∈A πt (a|s) exp η Q̂t (s, a)/(1 − γ) . Then
                                      P                                      

                                                         1−γ        πt+1 (a|s)
                                         Q̂πt (s, a) =       log Zt            .
                                                          η          πt (a|s)

Proof. See Lemma 4 from Xu et al. (2021).

The following lemma tells how much the worst-case value function of a given reward ri is im-
proved by updating πt to πt+1 using its corresponding robust policy gradient.                     The first term
       πt+1 ,P ′ [dKL (πt+1 (·|s)∥πt (·|s))] is always non-negative. The second term ∆t will be merged with other
1
  E
η s∼dν
errors later.
Lemma C.8. Under the NPG update rule with learning rate η, the robust value functions with an arbitrary
initial distribution ν satisfy the following inequality:

                         π                          1
                       Vit t+1 (ν) − Viπt t (ν) ≥     E π ,P ′ [dKL (πt+1 (·|s)∥πt (·|s))] + ∆t ,
                                                    η s∼dν t+1

where the worst-case transition probability of the policy πt and πt+1 are P and P ′ , respectively, and the error
term ∆t is given by
                   1               X                                                            
          ∆t :=        E πt+1 ,P ′       [πt (a | s) − πt+1 (a | s)] Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)
                1 − γ s∼dν
                                   a∈A
                  (1 − γ)                                            X                                          
               +          Es∼ν [log Zt ] − Es∼ν [Viπt t (s)] − Es∼ν       πt (a | s) Q̂πitt (s, a) − Qπitt (s, a) .
                     η
                                                                      a∈A


                                                             28
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Proof. Let the worst-case transition probability of the policy πt and πt+1 be P and P ′ , respectively. Their
                                                             π    ,P ′
corresponding visitation probabilities are dπν t ,P (s) and dν t+1 (s). Applying Theorem C.5 to the robust
                                π
value function Viπt t (ν) and Vit t+1 (ν), we obtain
                  π                        1               X
                Vit t+1 (ν) − Viπt t (ν) ≥     E πt+1 ,P ′     πt+1 (a | s)Aπitt (s, a)
                                         1 − γ s∼dν
                                                           a∈A
                                           1               X
                                       =       E πt+1 ,P ′     πt+1 (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Viπt t (s)]
                                         1−γ    s∼dν
                                                           a∈A
                                           1               X
                                       =       E πt+1 ,P ′     πt+1 (a | s)[Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                                         1 − γ s∼dν
                                                           a∈A
                                             1               X
                                         +       E πt+1 ,P ′     πt+1 (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                                           1−γ    s∼dν
                                                                       a∈A
                                                 1
                                             −      E π ,P ′ [Viπt t (s)].
                                               1 − γ s∼dν t+1
where the first equality applies the definition of the worst-case advantage function Aπ (s, a) := Qπ (s, a) −
V π (s), and the second equality applies the decomposition of the Q-function with its approximation error.
By the NPG update rule (Theorem C.7), we have
                                                               1−γ        πt+1 (a|s)
                                             Q̂πitt (s, a) =       log Zt            .
                                                                η          πt (a|s)
Then we obtain
                                              1                                 1−γ           πt+1 (a|s)
                                                                                                           
                 π
                                                             X
               Vit t+1 (ν) − Viπt t (ν) ≥         E π ,P ′       πt+1 (a | s)          log Zt
                                            1 − γ s∼dν t+1                       η              πt (a|s)
                                                             a∈A
                                                1              X
                                            +      E π ,P ′        πt+1 (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                                              1 − γ s∼dν t+1
                                                                       a∈A
                                            1
                                        −      E π ,P ′ [Viπt t (s)]
                                          1 − γ s∼dν t+1
                                        1                                              πt+1 (a|s)
                                                     X                                             
                                       = E πt+1 ,P ′     πt+1 (a | s) log Zt + log
                                        η s∼dν                                          πt (a|s)
                                                     a∈A
                                            1              X
                                        +      E π ,P ′         πt+1 (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                                          1 − γ s∼dν t+1
                                                                       a∈A
                                               1
                                          −       E π ,P ′ [Viπt t (s)]
                                             1 − γ s∼dν t+1
                                       (i) 1                                         1
                                       = E πt+1 ,P ′ dKL (πt+1 (·|s)∥πt (·|s)) + E πt+1 ,P ′ log Zt
                                           η s∼dν                                    η s∼dν
                                               1              X
                                          +       E πt+1 ,P ′      πt+1 (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                                             1−γ   s∼d ν
                                                                       a∈A
                                                1
                                            −      E π ,P ′ [Viπt t (s)].
                                              1 − γ s∼dν t+1
                                                                                                            h                i
                                                                                                                  πt+1 (a|s)
where (i) applies the definition of KL-divergence dKL (πt+1 (·|s)∥πt (·|s)) =                       (a        log  πt (a|s) .
                                                                                         P
                                                                                          a∈A π t+1    | s)

By the definition of Zt , we have
1                            1             X                                       
  E πt+1 ,P ′ log Zt (s) = E πt+1 ,P ′ log      πt (a|s) exp η Q̂πitt (s, a)/(1 − γ)
η s∼dµ                       η s∼dµ
                                           a∈A
                         (i) 1          X                                           
                         ≥ E πt+1 ,P ′      πt (a|s) log exp η Q̂πitt (s, a)/(1 − γ)
                             η s∼dµ
                                               a∈A


                                                                  29
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




                                        1               X                        
                                  =         E πt+1 ,P ′     πt (a|s) Q̂πitt (s, a)
                                      1 − γ s∼dµ
                                                        a∈A
                                        1               X                                                      
                                  =         E πt+1 ,P ′     πt (a|s) Q̂πitt (s, a) − Qπitt (s, a) + Qπitt (s, a)
                                      1 − γ s∼dµ
                                                        a∈A
                                  (ii)   1               X                                               1
                                   =         E πt+1 ,P ′     πt (a|s) Q̂πitt (s, a) − Qπitt (s, a) +           E π ,P ′ Viπt t (s, a),
                                       1 − γ s∼dµ                                                      1 − γ s∼dµt+1
                                                          a∈A
                                                                                                                                   (12)

where (i) applies the Jensen’s inequality, and (ii) applies the relation between Q-function and value function
(Proposition 2.2. from Li et al. (2022)). As the result, we obtain
             π
         Vit t+1 (ν) − Viπt t (ν)
          1                                             1                          1
        ≥ E πt+1 ,P ′ dKL (πt+1 (·|s)∥πt (·|s)) + E πt+1 ,P ′ log Zt −                E π ,P ′ [Viπt t (s)]
          η s∼dν                                        η s∼dν                   1 − γ s∼dν t+1
                1                 X                                        
         −          E πt+1 ,P ′       πt (a|s) Q̂πitt (s, a) − Qπitt (s, a)
             1 − γ s∼dµ
                                  a∈A
                1                 X                                        
         +          E πt+1 ,P ′       πt (a|s) Q̂πitt (s, a) − Qπitt (s, a)
             1 − γ s∼dµ
                                  a∈A
                1                 X
         +          E πt+1 ,P ′       πt+1 (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
             1−γ     s∼d ν
                                         a∈A
        (i) 1                                                   1                 X
        ≥        E   π     ,P ′   dKL (πt+1 (·|s)∥πt (·|s)) +      E πt+1 ,P ′        πt+1 (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
            η     s∼dν t+1                                   1 − γ s∼dν
                                                                                  a∈A
                   1                     X                                     
            +         E        πt+1 ,P ′   πt (a|s) Q̂πitt (s, a) − Qπitt (s, a)
                 1 − γ s∼dµ
                                         a∈A
              1(1 − γ)                                        X                                     
            +          Es∼ν log Zt − Es∼ν [Viπt t (s)] − Es∼ν   πt (a|s) Q̂πitt (s, a) − Qπitt (s, a) .
                  η
                                                                          a∈A

                                                                          π     ,P ′
where (i) we apply the change of measure to replace dν t+1                             with ν: (1) log Zt (s) + 1−γ
                                                                                                                 η
                                                                                                                          a∈A πt+1 (a |
                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                              t+1     π   ,P ′
s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)] − 1−γ
                                    η
                                       [Viπt t (s)] ≥ 0 for all s by Equation (12), and (2) dν ν                 (s) ≥ 1 − γ.
Therefore, we conclude that
             π
         Vit t+1 (ν) − Viπt t (ν)
          1                                              1               X
        ≥ E πt+1 ,P ′ dKL (πt+1 (·|s)∥πt (·|s)) +           E πt+1 ,P ′      πt+1 (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
          η s∼dν                                      1 − γ s∼dν
                                                                         a∈A
                1                 X                                   
         +          E π ,P ′          πt (a|s) Q̂it (s, a) − Qit (s, a)
                                                  πt          πt
             1 − γ s∼dµt+1
                                  a∈A
             (1 − γ)                                          X                                       
         +            Es∼ν log Zt − Es∼ν [Viπt t (s)] − Es∼ν      πt (a|s) Q̂πitt (s, a) − Qπitt (s, a) .
                 η
                                                                       a∈A

It completes the proof.

The following lemma is the main bound that we will deal with.
Lemma C.9. Under the NPG update rule with learning rate η, the robust value functions satisfy the following
inequality:
             ∗             π              1
         Viπt (µ) − Vit t+1 (µ) ≤           (Es∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥πt (·|s)) − Es∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥πt+1 (·|s)))
                                          η

                                                                     30
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




                                           1           X
                                       +       Es∼ν ∗       π ∗ (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                                         1−γ
                                                      a∈A
                                                 "
                                            1       π                              1
                                       +          Vit t+1 (ν ∗ ) − Viπt t (ν ∗ ) − E πt+1 ,P ′ DKL (πt+1 (·|s)∥πt (·|s))
                                         (1 − γ)                                   η s∼dν ∗
                                           1                  X
                                       −       E πt+1 ,P ′         πt+1 (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                                         1 − γ s∼dν ∗
                                                             a∈A
                                                                                                           #
                                           1                  X                                         
                                       −       E π ,P ′            πt (a|s) Q̂it (s, a) − Qit (s, a) +ψt ,
                                                                                  πt             πt
                                         1 − γ s∼dµt+1
                                                                a∈A

where the worst-case transition probability of the worst-case optimal policy π ∗ and πt+1 are P ∗ and P ′ ,
                                                                     ∗  ∗
respectively, and the visitation probability of π ∗ is ν ∗ (s) := dπµ ,P (s).

Proof. Let the worst-case transition probability of the worst-case optimal policy π ∗ be P ∗ and the visitation
probability of π ∗ be
                                                           ∗  ∗
                                             ν ∗ (s) := dπµ ,P (s).
Define
                            1                                          1
                  ψt :=        E π∗ ,Pt Ea∼π∗ (·|s) [Aπitt (s, a)] −      E π∗ ,P ∗ Ea∼π∗ (·|s) [Aπitt (s, a)],              (13)
                          1 − γ s∼dµ                                 1 − γ s∼dµ

where Pt denotes the worst-case transition probability of πt .
                                                                        ∗
Applying Theorem C.5 to the robust value function Viπt and Viπt t (i = 0, 1, . . . , I), we obtain

     ∗                     1         X
 Viπt (µ) − Viπt t (µ) ≤      Es∼ν ∗     π ∗ (a | s)Aπitt (s, a)+ψt
                          1−γ
                                     a∈A
                           1         X
                        =     Es∼ν ∗     π ∗ (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Viπt t (s)]+ψt
                          1−γ
                                     a∈A
                           1         X                                   1           X
                        =     Es∼ν ∗     π ∗ (a | s)[Q̂πitt (s, a)] +         Es∼ν ∗   π ∗ (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                          1−γ                                         1−γ
                                            a∈A                                           a∈A
                              1
                           −     Es∼ν ∗ [Viπt t (s)]+ψt .
                             1−γ

where the first equality applies the definition of the worst-case advantage function Aπ (s, a) := Qπ (s, a) −
V π (s), and the second equality applies the decomposition of the Q-function with its approximation error.
By the NPG update rule (Theorem C.7), we have

                                                1−γ           πt+1 (a|s)
                                                                        
                                   Q̂ (s, a) =
                                     πt
                                                      log Zt               .
                                                  η            πt (a|s)

Then we obtain
                                     1                            1−γ              πt+1 (a|s)
                                                                                               
            ∗                                   X
         Viπt (µ) − Viπt t (µ) ≤         Es∼ν ∗     π ∗ (a | s)           log Zt
                                   1−γ                              η                 πt (a|s)
                                                a∈A
                                       1          X
                                   +       Es∼ν ∗      π ∗ (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                                     1−γ
                                                    a∈A
                                 1
                              −      Es∼ν ∗ [Viπt t (s)]+ψt
                                1−γ
                                     "                                           #
                              1                     X                 πt+1 (a|s)
                             = Es∼ν ∗ log Zt +          π (a | s) log
                                                         ∗
                              η                                        πt (a|s)
                                                          a∈A


                                                                   31
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




                                    1         X
                               +       Es∼ν ∗   π ∗ (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                                   1−γ
                                                 a∈A
                                    1
                                −      Es∼ν ∗ [Viπt t (s)]+ψt
                                   1−γ
                             (i) 1
                             = Es∼ν ∗ [log Zt + dKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥πt (·|s)) − dKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥πt+1 (·|s))]
                                 η
                                    1          X                                                   1
                                +      Es∼ν ∗         π ∗ (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)] −     Es∼ν ∗ [Viπt t (s)]+ψt
                                   1−γ                                                            1−γ
                                                 a∈A
                              1               1
                             = Es∼ν ∗ log Zt + Es∼ν ∗ [dKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥πt (·|s)) − dKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥πt+1 (·|s))]
                              η               η
                                 1           X                                               1
                              +       Es∼ν ∗    π ∗ (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)] −     Es∼ν ∗ [Viπt t (s)]+ψt
                                1−γ                                                         1−γ
                                                 a∈A

where (i) applies the definition of KL-divergence. By Theorem C.8, we have
               (1 − γ)                                              X                                     
                       Es∼ν ∗ log Zt − Es∼ν ∗ [Viπt t (s)] − Es∼ν ∗   πt (a|s) Q̂πitt (s, a) − Qπitt (s, a)
                   η
                                                                         a∈A
                   π                             1
                ≤Vit t+1 (ν ∗ ) − Viπt t (ν ∗ ) − E πt+1 ,P ′ dKL (πt+1 (·|s)∥πt (·|s))
                                        η       ν∗
                                                   s∼d
                      1              X
                  −      E π ,P ′        πt+1 (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                    1 − γ s∼dν ∗t+1
                                     a∈A
                      1              X                                        
                  −      E πt+1 ,P ′     πt (a|s) Q̂πitt (s, a) − Qπitt (s, a)
                    1 − γ s∼dµ
                                          a∈A

Then we obtain
            ∗           π           1
         Viπt (µ) − Vit t+1 (µ) ≤     (Es∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥πt (·|s)) − Es∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥πt+1 (·|s)))
                                    η
                                        1           X
                                    +       Es∼ν ∗       π ∗ (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                                      1−γ
                                                    a∈A
                                              "
                                         1        π                            1
                                    +           V t+1 (ν ∗ ) − Viπt t (ν ∗ ) − E πt+1 ,P ′ DKL (πt+1 (·|s)∥πt (·|s))
                                      (1 − γ) it                               η s∼dν ∗
                                        1                 X
                                    −       E πt+1 ,P ′         πt+1 (a | s)[Qπitt (s, a) − Q̂πitt (s, a)]
                                      1−γ     s∼dν∗
                                                          a∈A
                                                                                                        #
                                        1                 X                                          
                                    −       E π ,P ′            πt (a|s) Q̂πitt (s, a) − Qπitt (s, a) +ψt
                                      1 − γ s∼dµt+1
                                                            a∈A

which is the final upper bound after applying the last inequality. Then we omit the term containing
−DKL (πt+1 (·|s)∥πt (·|s)) since it is always non-positive.

The following lemma gives the condition such that N0 is non-empty.
Lemma C.10. Consider the NPG update rule with learning rate η and let δ > 0 be chosen such that
                       1                                  ηL                    2ℓ
                  δ > Es∼ν ∗ DKL π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s) +           + ϵ̄approx +
                                                   
                                                                                      c,
                      T                                (1 − γ)2              (1 − γ)2
where ϵ̄approx is an error term depending on the approximation error terms, ℓ is the Lipschitz constant of
                                   ν , and L is the Lipschitz constant of the robust value function Vi (ν ), c
                                                                                                      π ∗
the state visitation distribution dπ,P
is the diameter of the uncertainty set given by Theorem C.4. Under these conditions,
                                                       ∗
                                     N0 := {t : Viπ (µ) − Viπt (µ) ≥ di − δ for all i}
is always non-empty.


                                                                32
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Proof. When t ∈ Ni := {t : Viπt is sampled to update}, we have it = i and by the algorithm design,
                                  ∗            π             ∗                     π              π
                              Viπ (µ) − Vi t+1 (µ) ≥ Viπ (µ) − di + δ + V̂i t+1 (µ) − Vi t+1 (µ)
                                                         h                       i
                                                            π            π
                                                   ≥ δ − V̂i t+1 (µ) − Vi t+1 (µ) .

We sum the inequality obtained from Theorem C.9 over t = 1, 2, . . . , T . Since the robust value function
V π (µ) is Lipschitz in π (Wang & Zou, 2021; Zhou et al., 2024), we have

                                                                                           Lη
                                       |V πt+1 (ν ∗ ) − V πt (ν ∗ )| ≤ L∥πt+1 − πt ∥ ≤        .
                                                                                          1−γ

Then we obtain
                                                                                                            T
          X        ∗        π
                                                                                 η 2 LT                   X
      η          Viπ (µ) − Vi t+1 (µ) + ηδT ≤ ηEs∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s)) +          + ηT ϵ̄approx +η     ψt ,
                                                                                 (1 − γ)2                  t=1
          i∈N0


where ψt is given by Equation (13) and ϵ̄approx is a constant upper bound (depending on Theorem 4.1) of
Capprox which is defined as

                    1           X
  Capprox :=             Es∼ν ∗     π ∗ (a | s)[Qπi t (s, a) − Q̂πi t (s, a)]
                  1−γ
                                a∈A
                            "
                       1         h
                                    π              π
                                                             i        1                X
                 +            − V̂i t+1 (µ) − Vi t+1 (µ) −                 E πt+1 ,P ′     πt+1 (a | s)[Qπi t (s, a) − Q̂πi t (s, a)]
                   (1 − γ)                                        1 − γ s∼dν ∗
                                                                                       a∈A
                                                                                    #
                      1                 X                                        
                 −        E π ,P ′           πt (a|s) Q̂πi t (s, a) − Qπi t (s, a) .
                   1 − γ s∼dµt+1
                                         a∈A


By appropriately choosing the policy evaluation algorithm (discussed in Section C.3), ϵ̄approx can be arbi-
trarily small. If N0 = ∅, then

                                                                                                  T
                                                                        η 2 LT                   X
                          ηδT ≤ ηE    s∼ν ∗   DKL (π (·|s)∥π1 (·|s)) +
                                                     ∗
                                                                                + ηT ϵ̄approx +η     ψt .
                                                                       (1 − γ)2                  t=1


We further take

                            2            ′  ′     ′          2ℓ                                            2ℓ
                 ψt ≤            dTV (dµπ ,P , dµπ ,P ) ≤          sup dTV (P ′ (·|s, a), P (·|s, a)) ≤          c,
                        (1 − γ)2                          (1 − γ)2 s,a                                  (1 − γ)2

where we apply the ℓ-Lipschitzness of the state visitation distribution (Lemma 5, Eq. (37), Chen & Huang
(2024)). Then, we let

                                 1                                      ηL                     2ℓ
                            δ>     Es∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s)) +           + ϵ̄approx +          c.
                                 T                                   (1 − γ) 2              (1 − γ)2

This hyper-parameter setting ensures that N0 is non-empty.

C.3       Robust Policy Evaluation

In this section, we collect two important robust policy evaluation techniques to discuss how to use these
methods to obtain the robust value function with sufficient accuracy. Though we use a simplified result in
this subsection, these results have been extended to more general setting in original sources.


                                                                   33
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




C.3.1   Option 1: The IPM Uncertainty Set

Lemma C.11 (Theorem 3, Zhou et al. (2024)). Let the value function V π is parameterized by w ∈ R|S|
with the linear feature ϕ ∈ R|S| . Then using the Robust Linear TD-Learning proposed by Zhou et al. (2024)
with step sizes αk = Θ(1/k), the output satisfies E∥wK − w∗ ∥2 = O(
                                                                  e 1 ).
                                                                    K

As shown by Li et al. (2022), the robust Q-function can be calculated using the robust value function learned
by the robust TD-learning algorithm described above. That is,

                                             Qπ (s, a) = r(s, a) + γ inf V π (s′ ).
                                                                         P ∈P

The second term inf P ∈P V π (s′ ) is given by Proposition 1 from Zhou et al. (2024). This result indicates that
we can obtain the robust Q-function with the convergence rate √1K (for the L∞ -norm).

C.3.2   Option 2: The p-Norm Uncertainty Set

We consider the following uncertainty set:

                                      V := {v ∈ R|S| | ⟨v, 1|S| ⟩ = 0, ∥v∥p ≤ β},
                                      U := V + P0 .

Let q satisfy 1q + p1 = 1. Then Oβ,p (·) : R|S| → R|S| is defined as:

                                                    sign(V (s′ ) − ωq (V ))|V (s′ ) − ωq (V )|q−1
                            Oβ,p (V )(s′ ) := β                                                   ,
                                                                    κq (V )q−1

where ωq (V ) := arg minω ∥V − ω1|S| ∥q and κq (V ) := minω ∥V − ω1|S| ∥q .
Lemma C.12 (Theorem 4.2, Kumar et al. (2023)). If the uncertainty set is defined as the p-norm (s, a)-
rectangular set, then the worst-case transition probability P+ (·|s, a) can be represented as

                                             P+ (·|s, a) = P0 (·|s, a) − βOβ,p (V )

where β is the radius of the uncertainty set and Oβ,p (V ) is the balanced robust value function (Kumar et al.,
2023).

Based on this result, we apply the following TD-learning update rule:
                                                                                                        

                      V (s) ← V (s) + α r(s, a) + γV (s′ ) − V (s) −γOβ,p (V )(s′ )V (s′ ) .                     (14)
                                         |          {z            }
                                                    stand. TD err. under P0


Here Oβ,p (·) : R|S| → R|S| is an operator determined by the uncertainty set. It is easy to observe that this
update rule is equivalent to the TD-learning over the worst-case transition probability:

                     Es′ ∼P0 (s′ |s,a) [r(s, a) + γV( s′ )] − γ⟨Oβ,p (V π ), V ⟩
                                    X                                   X
                    =r(s, a) + γ         P0 (s′ |s, a)π(a|s)V (s′ ) − γ     Oβ,p (V π )(s′ )V (s′ )
                                   s′ ,a                                      s′
                                   X                                       X
                    =r(s, a) + γ           P0 (s |s, a)π(a|s)V (s ) − γ
                                                ′                    ′
                                                                                   π(a|s)Oβ,p (V π )(s′ )V (s′ )
                                   s′ ,a                                   s′ ,a
                                   X
                    =r(s, a) + γ           π(a|s)[P0 (s′ |s, a) − Oβ,p (V0π )(s′ )]V (s′ )
                                   s′ ,a
                   (i)             X
                    =r(s, a) + γ           π(a|s)P+ (s′ |s, a)V (s′ )
                                   s′ ,a

                    =r(s, a) + γEs′ ∼P+ (s′ |s,a) V (s′ ),


                                                                34
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Algorithm 3: Rectified Robust Policy Optimization
input : initial policy parameters θ0 , empty set N0
for t = 0, · · · , T − 1 do
   Evaluate value functions under πt := πθt : Q̂πi t (s, a) ≈ Qπi t (s, a) for i = 0, 1, . . . , I ;
   Sample state-action pairs (sj , aj ) from the nominal distribution ;
   Compute value estimates Viπt for i = 0, . . . , I ;
   if Viπt ≥ di − δ for all i = 0, 1, . . . , I then
       // Threshold Updates
       Add θt to set N0 and track the feasible policy achieving the largest value πout = πt ;
       Update d0 : dt+1 0   ← V0πt ;
   else if Viπt < di − δ for some i = 1, . . . , I, 0 then
      // Constraint Rectification & Objective Rectification
      Maximize Viπt using Equation (8);
output: πout


where (i) applies the remarkable result from Theorem 4.2, Kumar et al. (2023): the worst-case transition
P+ is the rank-one perturbation of the nominal transition P0 . Therefore, by applying existing TD-learning
convergence analysis (Brandfonbrener & Bruna, 2019; Asadi et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), we obtain that the
convergence rate is also √1K .

C.4   A Compact Algorithm

We also include a compact version of Algorithm 1 in Algorithm 3 which merges the constraint rectification
and objective rectification together.

C.5   The Proof of Main Theorem

Here, we state the full version of Theorem 4.5.
Theorem C.13. Consider the NPG update rule with learning rate η. Let the constraint violation tolerance
δ > 0 be chosen to satisfy
                          2                                   2ηL                     4ℓ
                            Es∼ν ∗ DKL π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s) +          + 2ϵ̄approx +
                                                         
                    δ>                                                                      c,
                          T                                 (1 − γ)2               (1 − γ)2

where ℓ is the Lipschitz constant of the state visitation distribution dπ,P  ν , and L is the Lipschitz constant
of the robust value function Viπ (ν ∗ ), ϵ̄approx is the error caused by the robust policy evaluation step. Under
these conditions, the output policy πout satisfies:
                                       2                                   2ηL                     4ℓ
          E [V ∗ (µ) − V πout (µ)] ≤     Es∼ν ∗ DKL π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s) +          + 2ϵ̄approx +
                                                                      
                                                                                                         c,
                                       T                                 (1 − γ)2               (1 − γ)2
where the constraint violation of πout is guaranteed to be at most δ. Moreover, if setting
                                                (1 − γ)2 ϵ     (1 − γ)2 ϵ
                                                           ≤η≤            ,
                                                   2L 4           2L 3
                                                          2
the robust policy evaluation error ϵapprox ≤ (1−γ)
                                               12 ϵ, and the number of iteration step

                                                2L 12
                                       T ≥               Es∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s)),
                                             (1 − γ)2 ϵ2
then the output policy satisfies the ϵ-accuracy with a constant error; that is
                                                                            4ℓ
                                         E [V ∗ (µ) − V πout (µ)] ≤ ϵ+            c.
                                                                         (1 − γ)2

                                                              35
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




Proof. By the update rule, the boundary value d0 is non-decreasing. Since it is upper bounded, we conclude
that {dt0 } converges and we denote
                                                dt → d¯0
                                                       0

as t → ∞. More explicitly, we have

                                          d¯0 = sup{V0πt : Viπt < di + δ}.

There are only two cases for the output policy πout :
(1) The policy is better than the optimal policy while the relaxed constraint is violated; i.e.
                                                 ∗           π
                                             Viπ (µ) − Vi t+1 (µ) ≤ 0.

(2) The output policy is worse than the optimal policy but upper bounded by O( √1T ). When (1) holds,
                                                        ∗            π
then it is desired. When (1) doesn’t hold (i.e. Viπ (µ) − Vi t+1 (µ) > 0.), we assume |N0 | < T2 . It implies
PI
  i=1 |Ni | ≥ 2 . Then we have
              T


                                                                                   T
                 1                                       η 2 LT                   X
                   ηδT ≤ ηEs∼ν DKL (π (·|s)∥π1 (·|s)) +
                              ∗
                                     ∗
                                                                 + ηT ϵ̄approx +η     ψt
                 2                                      (1 − γ)2                  t=1
                                                                  η 2 LT                       2ℓ
                        ≤ ηEs∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s)) +              + ηT ϵ̄approx +ηT          c.          (15)
                                                                 (1 − γ)2                   (1 − γ)2
Here the last inequality applies the upper bound of ψt (see Theorem C.10 for the full derivation and the
definition of ℓ). Then we let
                           2                                     2ηL                     4ℓ
                     δ>      Es∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s)) +          + 2ϵ̄approx +          c.
                          ηT                                   (1 − γ)2               (1 − γ)2
This hyper-parameter setting ensures that Equation (15) does not hold. Therefore, it leads to a contradiction.
We obtain |N0 | ≥ T2 . In this case, we have

        0 ≤ E [V ∗ (µ) − V πout (µ)] ≤ Eπ∼N0 [V ∗ (µ) − V π (µ)]
                                        2                                     2ηL                     4ℓ
                                     ≤    Es∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s)) +          + 2ϵ̄approx +          c.
                                       ηT                                   (1 − γ)2               (1 − γ)2
Here the non-negativity is because V ∗ (µ) is the largest-possible value function over the feasible policy. From
the construction of N0 and the output policy πout , they are all feasible policies.
We are interested in obtaining the complexity of the convergence up to a constant value function error
(1−γ)2 c (typically, this term can be controlled by using a sufficiently small uncertainty set). To obtain the
  4ℓ

sample complexity, we set all three terms to be O(ϵ):

• Let (1−γ)
        2ηL
            2 ≤ 3 . Then we obtain
                ϵ


                                                            (1 − γ)2 ϵ
                                                     η≤                .
                                                               2L 3

• To make the last term 2ϵ̄approx ≤ 3ϵ , we set the robust policy evaluation error (Theorem 4.1) to be

                                                 ∥Q̂ − Q∥∞ ≤ ϵapprox .

   It leads to
                                             "                                    #
                        1               1                 1             1           ϵ
                           ϵapprox +           ϵapprox +     ϵapprox +     ϵapprox ≤ .
                       1−γ           (1 − γ)             1−γ           1−γ          3
                            2
   It solves ϵapprox ≤ (1−γ)
                         12 ϵ.


                                                            36
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




• Let ηT
       2
         Es∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s)) ≤ 3ϵ . We obtain
                                          2                                 3
                                    T ≥     Es∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s))
                                         ηT                                 ϵ
                                            2L 12
                                       ≥             Es∼ν ∗ DKL (π ∗ (·|s)∥π1 (·|s)).
                                         (1 − γ)2 ϵ2
                                                                                                                 2
    In the second step, we require the learning rate η is not too small; that is, we let it larger than (1−γ)
                                                                                                          2L 3 .
                                                                                                              ϵ

    This result indicate that the iteration complexity is T = O(ϵ ), with choosing an appropriate learning
                                                                   −2

    rate η = Θ(ϵ) and the approximation error ϵapprox = O(ϵ).




D     Experiment Setting

This section outlines the information for replicating our experiments. Throughout our experiments, we
include multiple independent runs and report the averaged metrics in our results. Specifically, we used three
different random seeds.

D.1    Hardware Specification and System Environment

We conducted our experiments on a computing desktop running Windows 10 Education, equipped with
3200MHz DDR4 DRAM memory, AMD Ryzen 7 3800X 8-Core, 16-Thread processor, and one NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 2070 Super graphics cards. All experiments are executed using Python version 3.10.14.

D.2    FrozenLake-Like Gridworld Experiment

The reward function is defined as follows:
                                                   
                                                   +1
                                                            if s′ is the target
                                   r0 (s, a, s′ ) = −1       if s′ is a brown block
                                                             otherwise
                                                   
                                                     −0.1
                                                   

and define r(s, a) := Es′ [r0 (s, a, s′ )]. The constraint reward function is defined as:
                                                 
                                                 −1 if s is out of the boundary
                                                           ′

                                 r1 (s, a, s′ ) = −1 if s′ is a brown block         .
                                                   0    otherwise
                                                 
                                                 

Here, we further define the cost function c(s, a) := −Es′ [r1 (s, a, s′ )] to better distinguish it with the rewards.
In this experiment, we require the cost value function −V1π (µ) less than 0.2, which means that the agent
should avoid hitting the brown block or move out of the box.
We used a discount factor γ = 0.99. The learning rates for both algorithms are set to 0.0001 and the tolerance
for constraint violations is δ = 0.01. The robustness of the environment was simulated by introducing a
slipping probability p = 0.2 in the test environment, which differs from the deterministic dynamics used
during training. For both methods, we run 1M steps.
During the training, we use the neural network taking a 2-dimensional input (the position of the agent) and
processes it through a single fully connected layers of size 64 followed by a ReLU activation then fed into a
final linear layer that produces 4 logits (four actions: Up, Down, Left, and Right).

D.3    Mountain Car Experiment

We use the standard Mountain Car environment provided by Towers et al. (2024). Once the car reaches the
goal, it is reset to the original starting point. The reward function is defined using the environment’s default


                                                            37
Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (08/2025)




setting:
                                                (
                                                    0    if the agent reaches the goal,
                              r0 (s, a, s ) =
                                        ′
                                                    −1   otherwise,

and we set r(s, a) := Es′ [r0 (s, a, s′ )]. To emphasize safety, we introduce the constraint reward function:
                                                (
                                                 −1 if the car’s speed exceeds 0.06,
                               r1 (s, a, s ) =
                                           ′
                                                 0   otherwise,

and define the cost function c(s, a) := −Es′ [ r1 (s, a, s′ )]. In this experiment, we account for environment
uncertainty by perturbing the “gravity” parameter from its nominal value 0.0025 to 0.003 in the worst-case
scenario. In this experiment, we set the constraint to be −4 (i.e. we require −V1π (µ) < 4). As shown in
Figure 3b, both CRPO and RRPO learn a feasible solution.
Given that the MountainCar environment has a continuous state space (i.e., the car’s position and velocity),
we employ radial basis function (RBF) features to achieve a linear approximation of the policy. Specifically,
each state s is first transformed into an RBF feature vector ϕ(s), which is then multiplied by the policy
parameters θ (one column per action) to generate logits; these logits are passed through a softmax function
to produce the policy distribution over actions. Additionally, we incorporate an ϵ-greedy strategy with an
initial ϵ = 0.1, decaying at a rate of 0.9999, to encourage exploration in the early stages of training.
We set the 2-norm (s, a)-rectangular uncertainty set defined by Equation (10). Since the state space is contin-
uous, when evaluating the centered value function, we uniformly sample 100 states from the state space to es-
timate the mean and the variance value of V π (s). The radius of the p-norm uncertainty set is set to be 0.0002.
This value is manually tuned from a preset hyper-parameter set {0.00001, 0.0001, 0.0002, 0.0003, 0.001}.
When the radius value is too high, the policy tends to be too conservative; when the radius value is too
small, the policy performs similar as the non-robust case.

D.4   Robust Control Experiment

In this experiment, we adopt the common PPO tricks to stablize the training. Each algorithm was trained for
2 million timesteps using identical hyperparameters to ensure fair comparison: learning rate of 3×10−4 , batch
size of 256, discount factor γ = 0.99, and PPO clip range of 0.2. We incorporated energy-based constraints
with a threshold of 0.25, representing a moderate constraint that provides meaningful limitations without
being overly restrictive. For the constrained algorithms, Primal-Dual Policy Gradient (Wang et al., 2022)
employed a constraint learning rate of 3 × 10−4 with Lagrange multiplier initialization of 0.1 and maximum
value of 100.0. On the construction of the uncertainty set, we follow Hou et al. (2020)’s robust Actor-Critic
algorithm to obtain the desired robust value function approximation. The radius of the uncertainty set is
set as 0.001. In our experiment, we ran three independent runs and reported the averaged results in the
experimental section.




                                                            38
